FAIL: test_thiswillfail (test_alltests_namechecker.TestNameCheck)

Ran 14 tests in 0.001s $FAILED (failures=1)$ Regression testing is the process of re-running previous tests when you make a change to a system. This testing checks that the change has not had unexpected side effects. The code change may have inadvertently broken existing code, or it may reveal bugs that were undetected in earlier tests. If you use automated tests, regression testing takes very little time. Therefore, after you make any change to your code, even a very minor change, you should always re-run all tests to make sure that everything continues to work as expected. M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 288 27/09/2020 14:06

## 9.2 ■ Test automation 289
Figure 9.5 The test pyramid Increased automation Reduced costs System Feature tests Unit tests Unit tests are the easiest to automate, so the majority of your tests should be unit tests. Mike Cohn, who first proposed the test pyramid (Figure 9.5), suggests that 70% of automated tests should be unit tests, 20% feature tests (he called these service tests), and 10% system tests (UI tests). The implementation of system features usually involves integrating functional units into components and then integrating these components to implement the feature. If you have good unit tests, you can be confident that the individual functional units and components that implement the feature will behave as you expect. However, as I explained, units may make different assumptions or may interact unexpectedly, so you still need feature tests. Generally, users access features through the product’s graphical user interface (GUI). However, GUI-based testing is expensive to automate so it is best to use an alternative feature testing strategy. This involves designing your product so that its features can be directly accessed through an API, not just from the user interface. The feature tests can then access features directly through the API without the need for direct user interaction through the system’s GUI (Figure 9.6). Accessing features through an API has the additional benefit that it is possible to re-implement the GUI without changing the functional components of the software. For example, a series of API calls may be required to implement a feature that allows a user to share a document with another user by specifying their email address. These calls collect the email address and the document identification information, check that the access permissions on the document allow sharing, check that the specified email address is valid and is a registered system user, and add the document to the sharing user’s workspace. M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 289 27/09/2020 14:06

|  |  |  |  |  | API |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|  | Feature 1 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Feature 2 |  |  |  |
|  |  | Feature 3 |  |  |  | Feature 4 |  |  |  |  |  |

290 Chapter 9 ■ Testing Figure 9.6 Feature testing through an API Feature When these calls have been executed, a number of conditions should hold: ■■ The status of the document is “shared.” ■■ The list of users sharing the document includes the specified email address. ■■ There have been no deletions from the list of users sharing the document. ■■ The shared document is visible to all users in the sharing list. You can’t usually implement automated feature tests using a single assertion. You need multiple assertions to check that the feature has executed as expected. Some feature test automation may be possible using a unit testing framework, but sometimes you have to use a specialized feature testing framework. System testing, which should follow feature testing, involves testing the system as a surrogate user. You identify user activities, possibly from scenarios, and then use the system to work through these activities. As a system tester, you go through a process of selecting items from menus, making screen selections, inputting information from the keyboard, and so on. You have to make careful observations and notes of how the system responds and of unexpected system behavior. You are looking for interactions between features that cause problems, sequences of actions that lead to system crashes, and other issues. Manual system testing, when testers have to repeat sequences of actions, is boring and prone to errors. In some cases, the timing of actions is important and is practically impossible to repeat consistently. To avoid these problems, testing tools have been developed to record a series of actions and automatically replay them when a system is retested (Figure 9.7). M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 290 27/09/2020 14:06

| System API |
| System being tested |

## 9.3 ■ Test-driven development 291
Figure 9.7 Interaction recording and playback User action Interaction User action recording session record playback Interaction recording tools record mouse movements and clicks, menu selections, keyboard inputs, and so on. They save the interaction session and can replay it, sending commands to the application and replicating them in the user’s browser interface. These tools also provide scripting support so that you can write and execute scenarios expressed as test scripts. This is particularly useful for cross-browser testing, where you need to check that your software works in the same way with different browsers. As I said, automated testing is one of the most important developments in software engineering, and I believe it has led to significant improvements in program quality. The danger with automated testing, however, is automation bias. Automation bias means that you choose tests because they can be automated, not because they are the best tests for the system. In reality, not all tests can be automated. Subtle problems, such as timing problems and issues caused by incorrect data dependencies, may only be detectable using manual testing. Consequently, you should always plan to do some manual product testing, where you simulate user sessions, before your product is released.
## 9.3 Test-driven development
Test-driven development (TDD) is an approach to program development that is based on the general idea that you should write an executable test or tests for code that you are writing before you write the code. TDD was introduced by early users of the Extreme Programming agile method, but it can be used M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 291 27/09/2020 14:06

292 Chapter 9 ■ Testing Figure 9.8 Test-driven development Start Identify new functionality Identify partial implementation of functionality Write code stub that will fail test incomplete complete Refactor code Implement code that if required should cause failing test to pass with any incremental development approach. Figure 9.8 is a model of the test-driven development process. Assume that you have identified some increment of functionality to be implemented. The stages of the test-driven development process are shown in Table 9.9. Test-driven development relies on automated testing. Every time you add some functionality, you develop a new test and add it to the test suite. All of the tests in the test suite must pass before you move on to developing the next increment. The benefits of test-driven development are:
# 1. It is a systematic approach to testing in which tests are clearly linked to
sections of the program code. This means you can be confident that your tests cover all of the code that has been developed and that there are no untested code sections in the delivered code. In my view, this is the most significant benefit of TDD. M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 292 27/09/2020 14:06

| Identify partial implementation | Break down the implementation of the functionality required into smaller mini- units. Choose one of these mini-units for implementation. |
| Write mini-unit tests | Write one or more automated tests for the mini- unit that you have chosen for implementation. The mini-unit should pass these tests if it is properly implemented. |
| Write a code stub that will fail test | Write incomplete code that will be called to implement the mini-unit. You know this will fail. |
| Run all automated tests | Run all existing automated tests. All previous tests should pass. The test for the incomplete code should fail. |
| Implement code that should cause the failing test to pass | Write code to implement the mini-unit, which should cause it to operate correctly. |
| Rerun all automated tests | If any tests fail, your code is incorrect. Keep working on it until all tests pass. |
| Refactor code if required | If all tests pass, you can move on to implementing the next mini-unit. If you see ways of improving your code, you should do this before the next stage of implementation. |

## 9.3 ■ Test-driven development 293
Table 9.9 Stages of test-driven development Identify partial implementation Break down the implementation of the functionality required into smaller miniunits. Choose one of these mini-units for implementation. Write mini-unit tests Write one or more automated tests for the miniunit that you have chosen for implementation. The mini-unit should pass these tests if it is properly implemented. Write a code stub that will fail test Write incomplete code that will be called to implement the mini-unit. You know this will fail. Run all automated tests Run all existing automated tests. All previous tests should pass. The test for the incomplete code should fail. Implement code that should Write code to implement the mini-unit, which cause the failing test to pass should cause it to operate correctly. Rerun all automated tests If any tests fail, your code is incorrect. Keep working on it until all tests pass. Refactor code if required If all tests pass, you can move on to implementing the next mini-unit. If you see ways of improving your code, you should do this before the next stage of implementation.
# 2. The tests act as a written specification for the program code. In principle
at least, it should be possible to understand what the program does by reading the tests. I’m not convinced that test code is all you need for a specification, but there is no doubt that tests help you understand the code being tested.
# 3. Debugging is simplified because, when a program failure is observed, you
can immediately link this to the last increment of code that you added to the system.
# 4. It is argued that TDD leads to simpler code, as programmers only write
code that’s necessary to pass tests. They don’t overengineer their code with complex features that aren’t needed. M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 293 27/09/2020 14:06

294 Chapter 9 ■ Testing Test-driven development and automated testing using executable tests were developed around the same time. Some people who write about the benefits of TDD conflate it and automated testing. Consequently, you may see regression testing suggested as a benefit of TDD, whereas this is actually a benefit of automated testing, whether or not these tests were developed before or after the code. The same is true for refactoring tests that check that code refactoring has not introduced new bugs into the code. Test-driven development works best for the development of individual program units; it is more difficult to apply to system testing. Even the strongest advocates of TDD accept that it is challenging to use this approach when you are developing and testing systems with graphical user interfaces. Many programmers have enthusiastically adopted TDD and are happy with this approach. They claim that it is a more productive way to develop software and that the resulting software has fewer bugs than it would have without TDD. They also claim that the developed code is better structured and easier to understand. There have been several experiments to test whether this is actually the case. These experiments were inconclusive. However, there are divided opinions in the software engineering community about the value of TDD. After experimenting with the approach for some time, I wrote a blog post about why I had decided to give up on it.2 TDD didn’t work for me because I spent more time thinking about the tests than about the program, and I didn’t think that was a good thing. My post received a huge number of comments, which were roughly evenly split. Adherents of TDD, as I anticipated, simply told me that I wasn’t doing it right. Others strongly agreed with what I said about the problems with the approach. I’ve summarized my reasons for not using TDD in Table 9.10. My view is that TDD suits some people psychologically better than others. It didn’t really work for me, but it might work for you. As I say in my blog post, I think it is sensible to be pragmatic about TDD. Sometimes it is very helpful to write tests first, as it helps you clarify your understanding of what the program should do. On other occasions, it is faster and easier to develop that understanding by writing code first. 2http://iansommerville.$\frac{com}{systems-software-and}$-$\frac{technology}{giving-up-on-test}$-firstdevelopment/ M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 294 27/09/2020 14:06

| Reason | Explanation |
| TDD discourages radical program change. | I found that I was reluctant to make refactoring decisions that I knew would cause many tests to fail. I tended to avoid radical program change for this reason. |
| I focused on the tests rather than the problem I was trying to solve. | A basic principle of TDD is that your design should be driven by the tests you have written. I found that I was unconsciously redefining the problem I was trying to solve to make it easier to write tests. This meant that I sometimes didn’t implement important checks, because it was difficult to write tests in advance of their implementation. |
| I spent too much time thinking about the implementation details rather than the programming problem. | Sometimes when programming, it is best to step back and look at the program as a whole rather than focusing on implementation details. TDD encourages a focus on details that might cause tests to pass or fail rather than the overall structure of the program. |
| It is hard to write “bad data” tests. | Many problems involve dealing with messy and incomplete data. It is practically impossible to anticipate all of the data problems that might arise and write tests for these in advance. You might argue that you should simply reject bad data, but this is sometimes impractical. |

## 9.4 ■ Security testing 295
Table 9.10 My reasons for not using TDD TDD discourages radical program I found that I was reluctant to make change. refactoring decisions that I knew would cause many tests to fail. I tended to avoid radical program change for this reason. I focused on the tests rather than the A basic principle of TDD is that your design problem I was trying to solve. should be driven by the tests you have written. I found that I was unconsciously redefining the problem I was trying to solve to make it easier to write tests. This meant that I sometimes didn’t implement important checks, because it was difficult to write tests in advance of their implementation. I spent too much time thinking about Sometimes when programming, it is best the implementation details rather to step back and look at the program as a than the programming problem. whole rather than focusing on implementation details. TDD encourages a focus on details that might cause tests to pass or fail rather than the overall structure of the program. It is hard to write “bad data” tests. Many problems involve dealing with messy and incomplete data. It is practically impossible to anticipate all of the data problems that might arise and write tests for these in advance. You might argue that you should simply reject bad data, but this is sometimes impractical.
## 9.4 Security testing
The goals of program testing are to find bugs and to provide convincing evidence that the program being tested does what it is supposed to do. Security testing has comparable goals. It aims to find vulnerabilities that an attacker may exploit and to provide convincing evidence that the system is sufficiently secure. The tests should demonstrate that the system can resist attacks on its availability, attacks that try to inject malware, and attacks that try to corrupt or steal users’ data and identity. Discovering vulnerabilities is much harder than finding bugs. Functional tests to discover bugs are driven by an understanding of what the software should do. Your tests only have to show that your software is operating as expected. However, you face three challenges in vulnerability testing: M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 295 27/09/2020 14:06

| Unauthorized attacker gains access to a system using authorized credentials. |
| Authorized individual accesses resources that are forbidden to that person. |
| Authentication system fails to detect unauthorized attacker. |
| Attacker gains access to database using SQL poisoning attack. |
| Improper management of HTTP sessions. |
| HTTP session cookies are revealed to an attacker. |
| Confidential data are unencrypted. |
| Encryption keys are leaked to potential attackers. |

296 Chapter 9 ■ Testing Table 9.11 Examples of security risks
# 1. When you are testing for vulnerabilities, you are testing for something that
the software should not do, so there are an infinite number of possible tests.
# 2. Vulbenerabilities are often obscure and lurk in rarely used code, so they
may not be revealed by normal functional tests.
# 3. Software products depend on a software stack that includes operating
systems, libraries, databases, browsers, and so on. These may contain vulnerabilities that affect your software. These vulnerabilities may change as new versions of software in the stack are released. Comprehensive security testing requires specialist knowledge of software vulnerabilities and approaches to testing that can find these vulnerabilities. Product development teams don’t normally have the experience required for this security testing, so ideally you should involve external specialists in security testing. Many companies offer penetration testing (pen testing) services, where they simulate attacks on your software and use their ingenuity to find ways to break its security. Independent security testing is expensive, however, and may not be affordable by startup product companies. One practical way to organize security testing is to adopt a risk-based approach, where you identify the common risks and then develop tests to demonstrate that the system protects itself from these risks. You may also use automated tools that scan your system to check for known vulnerabilities, such as unused HTTP ports being left open. In a risk-based approach, you start by identifying the main security risks to your product. To identify these risks, you use knowledge of possible attacks, known vulnerabilities, and security problems. Table 9.11 shows examples of the risks that you might test for. M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 296 27/09/2020 14:06

## 9.4 ■ Security testing 297
Based on the risks that have been identified, you then design tests and checks to see if the system is vulnerable. It may be possible to construct automated tests for some of these checks, but others inevitably involve manual checking of the system’s behavior and its files. Once you have identified security risks, you then analyze them to assess how they might arise. For example, for the first risk in Table 9.11 (unauthorized attacker) there are several possibilities:
# 1. The user has set weak passwords that an attacker can guess.
# 2. The system’s password file has been stolen and an attacker has discovered
the passwords.
# 3. The user has not set up two-factor authentication.
# 4. An attacker has discovered the credentials of a legitimate user through
social engineering techniques. You can then develop tests to check some of these possibilities. For example, you might run a test to check that the code that allows users to set their passwords always checks the strength of the passwords. It should not allow users to set passwords that are easy to crack. You may also test that users are always prompted to set up two-factor authentication. The reliable programming techniques that I explained in Chapter 8 provide some protection against these risks. However, this does not mean that you do not need security testing. Developers might have made mistakes. For example, they might have forgotten to check the validity of some inputs or forgotten to implement a password strength check when a password is changed. As well as adopting a risk-based approach to security testing, you can use basic tests that check whether or not common programming mistakes have occurred. These might test that sessions are properly closed or that inputs have been validated. An example of a basic test that checks for incorrect session management is a simple login test:
# 1. Log into a web application.
# 2. Navigate to a different website.
# 3. Click the BACK button of the browser
When you navigate away from a secure application, the software should automatically log you out so that you have to re-authenticate if you go back to that application. Otherwise, if someone gets access to your computer, they could use M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 297 27/09/2020 14:06

298 Chapter 9 ■ Testing the BACK button to get into your supposedly secure account. Most types of security testing involve complex steps and outside-the-box thinking, but sometimes simple tests, like this one, help to expose the most severe security risks. You need to think differently if you are to be a successful security tester. When you are testing the features of a system, it is sensible to focus on those features that are most used and to test the “normal” usage of these features. However, when you are testing the security of a system, you need to think like an attacker rather than a normal end-user. This means that you deliberately try to do the wrong thing because system vulnerabilities often lurk in rarely used code that handles exceptional situations. You may repeat actions several times because sometimes this leads to different behavior. A widely publicized Apple security bug was revealed when a tester tried logging in with no password several times. On the fifth or sixth attempt, access was allowed. My guess is that there was some code included to make it easier to test the system without remembering passwords and then the developers forgot to remove this code before they shipped the system.
## 9.5 Code reviews
Testing is the most widely used technique for finding bugs in programs. However, it suffers from three fundamental problems:
# 1. You can only test code against your understanding of what that code
should do. If you have misunderstood the purpose of the code, then this will be reflected in both the code and the tests.
# 2. Tests are sometimes difficult to design, with the consequence that the
tests you write may not provide coverage of all the code you have written. This is most often a problem with code that handles rarely occurring errors and exceptions. One of the arguments for TDD is that it avoids this problem. You always have code associated with each test. However, TDD simply changes this problem. Instead of test incompleteness, you may have code incompleteness because you don’t think about rare exceptions.
# 3. Testing doesn’t really tell you anything about other attributes of a pro-
gram, such as its readability, structure, or evolvability or whether it is interacting efficiently with its environment. To reduce the effects of these problems, many software companies insist that all code has to go through a process of code review before it is integrated into the product codebase. Code reviews complement testing. They are M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 298 27/09/2020 14:06

| Set up review |  |
| Prepare code |  |
| Distribute $\frac{code}{tests}$ |  |
|  | Check code |  |
|  | Write review report |  |
|  | Prepare to-do list |  |
|  | Make code changes |  |
| Set up review | The programmer contacts a reviewer and arranges a review date. |
| Prepare code | The programmer collects the code and tests for review and annotates them with information for the reviewer about the intended purpose of the code and tests. |
| Distribute $\frac{code}{tests}$ | The programmer sends code and tests to the reviewer. |
| Check code | The reviewer systematically checks the code and tests against their understanding of what they are supposed to do. |
| Write review report | The reviewer annotates the code and tests with a report of the issues to be discussed at the review meeting. |
| Discussion | The reviewer and programmer discuss the issues and agree on the actions to resolve these. |
| Make to-do list | The programmer documents the outcome of the review as a to-do list and shares this with the reviewer. |
| Make code changes | The programmer modifies the code and tests to address the issues raised in the review. |

## 9.5 ■ Code reviews 299
Figure 9.9 Code reviews Programmer Reviewer Programmer Set up review Check Reviewer Prepare code to-do list Prepare code Discussion Make code Write review changes Distribute report Programmer $\frac{code}{tests}$ Review preparation Code checking Review Follow-up effective in finding bugs that arise through misunderstandings and bugs that may arise only when unusual sequences of code are executed. Figure 9.9 shows the activities involved in the code review process. Details of the process vary across companies, depending on their culture (more or less formal) and their normal way of working. Table 9.12 describes each of these activities in more detail. Table 9.12 Code review activities Set up review The programmer contacts a reviewer and arranges a review date. Prepare code The programmer collects the code and tests for review and annotates them with information for the reviewer about the intended purpose of the code and tests. Check code The reviewer systematically checks the code and tests against their understanding of what they are supposed to do. Write review report The reviewer annotates the code and tests with a report of the issues to be discussed at the review meeting. Discussion The reviewer and programmer discuss the issues and agree on the actions to resolve these. Make to-do list The programmer documents the outcome of the review as a to-do list and shares this with the reviewer. Make code changes The programmer modifies the code and tests to address the issues raised in the review. M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 299 27/09/2020 14:06

300 Chapter 9 ■ Testing Code reviews involve one or more people examining the code to check for errors and anomalies and discussing issues with the developer. If problems are identified, it is the developer’s responsibility to change the code to fix the problems. The general idea of code reviews was first publicized in the 1970s under the name “program inspections.” Program inspections involved a team of four to six people examining the code and preparing a formal report on the problems they discovered. Inspections are very effective in discovering programming errors, but because so many people are involved, they are expensive and timeconsuming to organize. Consequently, a lightweight approach is now the norm for code reviews. A single code reviewer is used, who may be part of the same development team or may work in a related area. As well as checking the code under review, the reviewer should also look at the automated tests that have been developed. The reviewer should check that the test set is complete and that the tests are consistent with their understanding of the purpose of the code. Code reviews should be approached positively by both the programmer and the reviewer. The reviewer should not implicitly or explicitly criticize the programmer’s ability and should not see the review as a way to show how clever they are. You may collect metrics, such as the number of discovered defects, from code reviews. These should be used to improve the review process rather than to evaluate the developers involved. Apart from the obvious benefit of finding bugs, code reviews are important for sharing knowledge of a codebase. If all members of the team are involved in reviewing and programming, this means that if people leave or are unavailable, then it is easier for others to pick up their work and continue its development. Along with looking for bugs and misunderstandings in the code, the reviewer may comment on the readability and understandability of the code. If your company has a coding standard, then the review should check conformance to this standard. However, I think it is best to use an automated tool for standards checking and to use it before submitting code for review. Program inspections and code reviews usually involve a meeting between the developer and the code reviewers. I think this is the most effective way to organize a review. Face-to-face discussions are the quickest way to resolve misunderstandings. In companies where teams may not all work in the same place, however, the review may involve a phone discussion about the code. As a general rule, you should not attempt to do too much in a review. It should last around an hour, so that between 200 and 400 lines of code can M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 300 27/09/2020 14:06

| Review check | Rationale |
| Are meaningful variables and function names used? (General) | Meaningful names make a program easier to read and understand. |
| Have all data errors been considered and tests developed for these? (General) | It is easy to write tests for the most common cases, but it is equally important to check that the program won’t fail when presented with incorrect data. |
| Are all exceptions explicitly handled? (General) | Unhandled exceptions may cause a system to crash. |
| Are default function parameters used? (Python) | Python allows default values to be set for function parameters when the function is defined. This often leads to errors when programmers forget about or misuse them. |
| Are types used consistently? (Python) | Python does not have compile-time type checking, so it is possible to assign values of different types to the same variable. This is best avoided, but if used, it should be justified. |
| Is the indentation level correct? (Python) | Python uses indentation rather than explicit brackets after conditional statements to indicate the code to be executed if the condition is true or false. If the code is not properly indented in nested conditionals, this may mean that incorrect code is executed. |

## 9.5 ■ Code reviews 301
Table 9.13 Part of a checklist for a Python code review Are meaningful variables and function Meaningful names make a program easier names used? (General) to read and understand. Have all data errors been considered It is easy to write tests for the most and tests developed for these? common cases, but it is equally important (General) to check that the program won’t fail when presented with incorrect data. Are all exceptions explicitly handled? Unhandled exceptions may cause a system (General) to crash. Are default function parameters used? Python allows default values to be set for (Python) function parameters when the function is defined. This often leads to errors when programmers forget about or misuse them. Are types used consistently? (Python) Python does not have compile-time type checking, so it is possible to assign values of different types to the same variable. This is best avoided, but if used, it should be justified. Is the indentation level correct? Python uses indentation rather than explicit (Python) brackets after conditional statements to indicate the code to be executed if the condition is true or false. If the code is not properly indented in nested conditionals, this may mean that incorrect code is executed. be reviewed in a single session. Because people make similar mistakes, it is usually effective to prepare a checklist for reviewers to use while checking the code. Checklists may contain a mix of general items and specific items based on characteristic errors that can occur in the programming language that is used. You can find checklists for most programming languages on the web. Table 9.13 shows part of a checklist for reviewing Python code. Several code review tools are now available to support the process. Using these tools, both the programmer and the reviewer can annotate the code being reviewed and document the review process by creating to-do lists. These review tools can be set up so that whenever a programmer submits code to a repository such as Github, a code review is automatically set up. Review tools may also integrate with an issue tracking system, messaging systems such as Slack, and voice communication systems such as Skype. M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 301 27/09/2020 14:06

302 Chapter 9 ■ Testing ■■ The aim of program testing is to find bugs and to show that a program does what its developers expect it to do. ■■ Four types of testing that are relevant to software products are functional testing, user testing, load and performance testing, and security testing. ■■ Unit testing involves testing program units, such as functions or class methods, that have a single responsibility. Feature testing focuses on testing individual system features. System testing tests the system as a whole to check for unwanted interactions between features and between the system and its environment. ■■ Identifying equivalence partitions, in which all inputs have the same characteristics, and choosing test inputs at the boundaries of these partitions are an effective way of finding bugs in a program. ■■ User stories may be used as a basis for deriving feature tests. ■■ Test automation is based on the idea that tests should be executable. You develop a set of executable tests and run these each time you make a change to a system. ■■ The structure of an automated unit test should be arrange-action-assert. You set up the test parameters, call the function or method being tested, and make an assertion about what should be true after the action has been completed. ■■ Test-driven development is an approach in which executable tests are written before the code. Code is then developed to pass the tests. ■■ A disadvantage of test-driven development is that programmers focus on the details of passing tests rather than considering the broader structure of their code and algorithms used. ■■ Security testing may be risk-driven, with a list of security risks used to identify tests that may reveal system vulnerabilities. ■■ Program reviews are an effective supplement to testing. They involve people checking the code to comment on its quality and to look for bugs. “An Overview of Software Testing” This good article goes into more detail about different types of software testing. (M. Parker, 2015) http://openconcept.ca/blog/$\frac{mparker}{overview-software}$-testing “How to Perform Software Product Testing” My coverage of testing focuses on testing during the initial development of a product. This interesting article discusses the broader issues of testing over a product’s life cycle, from introduction to product retirement. (Software Testing Help, 2017) M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 302 27/09/2020 14:06

Exercises 303 http://www.softwaretestinghelp.$\frac{com}{how-perform-software}$-product-testing/ “Why Most Unit Testing Is Waste” This view is contrary to the conventional wisdom that most tests should be automated unit tests. It is written by an author who was one of the original authors of the Design Patterns book. He argues that integration and system tests deliver real value, whereas a big proportion of unit tests tell us nothing that we don’t know about the code. I don’t agree with everything the author says, but I do agree with his general premise that thinking is more valuable than testing. (J. O. Coplien, 2014) https://rbcs-us.com/$\frac{documents}{Why-Most-Unit}$-Testing-is-Waste.pdf “The Art of Agile Development: Test-Driven Development” This is an online version of a chapter from the book The Art of Agile Development, a good description of test-driven development that goes into much more detail than I do here. Examples are in Java. (J. Shore, 2010) http://www.jamesshore.$\frac{com}{Agile}$-Book/test_driven_development.html “Introducing BDD” Behavior-driven design is an evolution of test-driven design where the focus of the testing process is the expected behavior of the software being tested. A stylized language can be used to describe behavior and tests derived from this description. I have never tried this approach, but it seems to get around some of the problems with TDD. (D. North, 2006) https://dannorth.$\frac{net}{introducing}$-bdd/ “Best Practices for Code Review” This is a nice summary of good review practice from a vendor of Collaborator, a code review tool. The same site has a number of blog posts that expand on these practices and provide review checklists. (SmartBear, 2018) https://smartbear.com/$\frac{learn}{code}$-$\frac{review}{best-practices-for}$-peer-code-review/ https://iansommerville.$\frac{com}{engineering-software}$-$\frac{products}{testing}$
## 9.1. Explain why you can never be completely confident that program testing has revealed all
the faults in a software product.
## 9.2. What are the important distinctions between unit testing and feature testing?
M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 303 27/09/2020 14:06

| Emma is a history teacher who is arranging a school trip to the historic battlefields in northern France. She wants to set up a “battlefields group” where the students who are attending the trip can share their research about the places they are visiting as well as their pictures and thoughts about the visit. |
| Emma logs in to a “group management” app, which recognizes her role and school from her identity information and creates a new group. The system prompts her for her year ($S^3$) and subject (history) and automatically populates the new group with all $S^3$ students who are studying history. She selects the students going on the trip and adds her teacher colleagues, Jamie and Claire, to the group. |
| She names the group and confirms the group creation. This sets up an icon on her iLearn screen to represent the group, creates an email alias for the group, and asks Emma if she wishes to share the group. She shares access to the group with everyone in the group, which means that they also see the icon on their screen. To avoid getting too many emails from students, she restricts sharing of the email alias to Jamie and Claire. |

304 Chapter 9 ■ Testing Table 9.14 Setting up a group email Emma is a history teacher who is arranging a school trip to the historic battlefields in northern France. She wants to set up a “battlefields group” where the students who are attending the trip can share their research about the places they are visiting as well as their pictures and thoughts about the visit. Emma logs in to a “group management” app, which recognizes her role and school from her identity information and creates a new group. The system prompts her for her year ($S^3$) and subject (history) and automatically populates the new group with all $S^3$ students who are studying history. She selects the students going on the trip and adds her teacher colleagues, Jamie and Claire, to the group. She names the group and confirms the group creation. This sets up an icon on her iLearn screen to represent the group, creates an email alias for the group, and asks Emma if she wishes to share the group. She shares access to the group with everyone in the group, which means that they also see the icon on their screen. To avoid getting too many emails from students, she restricts sharing of the email alias to Jamie and Claire.
## 9.3. Imagine that your software includes a feature that can automatically create a contents
list for a document or book. Suggest tests that you might develop to test this feature. It is described by the following user stories: (a) As a user, I want to automatically create a contents list for my document that includes all of the headings that I have marked up in my text. (b) As a user, I want to be able to identify elements of a contents list and mark these up at different levels. For simplicity, I have left out stories concerned with formatting the contents list.
## 9.4. Table 9.14 is a simplified version of the scenario I used in Chapter 3 for the iLearn system
(see Table 3.6). Suggest six end-to-end tests that could be used to test the features of the system in this scenario.
## 9.5. Explain why it is easier to develop automated unit tests than automated feature tests.
## 9.6. Using any programming language that you know, write a $\frac{function}{method}$ that accepts
a list of integers as a parameter and returns the sum of the numbers in that list. Using an appropriate test framework, write automated tests to test that function. Make sure you test with both incorrect and correct data.
## 9.7. What is regression testing, and why is it important? Explain why automated testing makes
regression testing straightforward.
## 9.8. Explain why it is essential to have a refactoring stage in the test-driven development
process.
## 9.9. Explain why software security testing is more difficult than functional testing.
## 9.10. Give three reasons why you should use code reviews as well as testing when you are
developing software. M09_SOME6349_01_GE_C09.indd 304 27/09/2020 14:06

10 DevOps and Code Management The ultimate goal of software product development is to release a product to customers. Mobile products are usually released through an app store; products for computers and servers may be made available for downloading from the vendor’s website or an app store. Increasingly, however, software products are made available as a cloud-based service, so there is no need for customer downloads. After you have released your product, you have to provide some customer support. This may be as little as a list of FAQs on a web page or as much as a dedicated help desk that users may contact. You may also collect problem reports from customers to help you decide what changes to make in later releases of your product. Traditionally, separate teams were responsible for software development, software release, and software support (Figure 10.1). The development team passed a “final” version of the software to a release team. That team then built a release version, tested it, and prepared release documentation before releasing the software to customers. A third team provided customer support. The original development team was sometimes responsible for implementing software changes. Alternatively, the software may have been maintained by a separate maintenance team. In these processes, communication delays between the groups were inevitable. Development and operations engineers used different tools, had different skill sets, and often didn’t understand the other’s problems. Even when an urgent bug or security vulnerability was identified, it could take several days for a new release to be prepared and pushed to customers. Many companies still use this traditional model of development, release, and support. However, more and more companies are using an alternative M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 305 27/09/2020 14:07

306 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Figure 10.1 Development, release, and support Problem and bug reports Development Release Support Tested software Deployed software ready for release ready for use approach called DevOps. DevOps (development + operations) integrates development, deployment, and support, with a single team responsible for all of these activities (Figure 10.2). Three factors led to the development and widespread adoption of DevOps:
# 1. Agile software engineering reduced the development time for software,
but the traditional release process introduced a bottleneck between development and deployment. Agile enthusiasts started looking for a way around this problem.
# 2. Amazon re-engineered their software around services and introduced an
approach in which a service was both developed and supported by the Figure 10.2 DevOps Development Deployment Support Multi-skilled DevOps team M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 306 27/09/2020 14:07

| Principle | Explanation |
| Everyone is responsible for everything. | All team members have joint responsibility for developing, delivering, and supporting the software. |
| Everything that can be automated should be automated. | All activities involved in testing, deployment, and support should be automated if it is possible to do so. There should be mimimal manual involvement in deploying software. |
| Measure first, change later. | DevOps should be driven by a measurement program where you collect data about the system and its operation. You then use the collected data to inform decisions about changing DevOps processes and tools. |

Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management 307 Table 10.1 DevOps principles Everyone is responsible for All team members have joint responsibility everything. for developing, delivering, and supporting the Everything that can be automated All activities involved in testing, deployment, should be automated. and support should be automated if it is possible to do so. There should be mimimal manual involvement in deploying software. Measure first, change later. DevOps should be driven by a measurement program where you collect data about the system and its operation. You then use the collected data to inform decisions about changing DevOps processes and tools. same team. Amazon’s claim that this led to significant improvements in reliability was widely publicized.
# 3. It became possible to release software as a service, running on a public
or private cloud. Software products did not have to be released to users on physical media or downloads. There is no simple definition of DevOps. Companies interpret the integration of development and operations differently, depending on their culture and the type of software they are developing. However, the three fundamental principles listed in Table 10.1 are the basis for effective DevOps. Likewise, the specific benefits of using DevOps depend on a company’s technology, organization, and culture. However, almost all adopters of DevOps report that important benefits to them are a faster deployment cycle for their software, reduced risk of major failures or outages, faster problem resolution, and more stable and productive teams. I explain why these are universal benefits of DevOps in Table 10.2. For software product companies, all aspects of DevOps are relevant if your product is delivered as a cloud-based service. If your product is released through an app store or through your website, DevOps is still relevant. Some processes, however, such as continuous delivery, have to be modified for downloaded software. In this chapter, I focus on automation and measurement, the technical aspects of DevOps. However, many people argue that without the right culture, the full potential of DevOps cannot be realized. Historically, there has often been a culture of mistrust between development and operations engineers. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 307 27/09/2020 14:07

| Faster deployment | Software can be deployed to production more quickly because communication delays between the people involved in the process are dramatically reduced. |
| Reduced risk | The increment of functionality in each release is small so there is less chance of feature interactions and other changes that cause system failures and outages. |
| Faster repair | DevOps teams work together to get the software up and running again as soon as possible. There is no need to discover which team was responsible for the problem and to wait for them to fix it. |
| More productive teams | DevOps teams are happier and more productive than the teams involved in the separate activities. Because team members are happier, they are less likely to leave to find jobs elsewhere. |

308 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Table 10.2 Benefits of DevOps Faster deployment Software can be deployed to production more quickly because communication delays between the people involved in the process are dramatically reduced. Reduced risk The increment of functionality in each release is small so there is less chance of feature interactions and other changes that cause system failures and outages. Faster repair DevOps teams work together to get the software up and running again as soon as possible. There is no need to discover which team was responsible for the problem and to wait for them to fix it. More productive teams DevOps teams are happier and more productive than the teams involved in the separate activities. Because team members are happier, they are less likely to leave to find jobs elsewhere. DevOps aims to change this by creating a single team that is responsible for both development and operations. Developers also take responsibility for installing and maintaining their software. Creating a DevOps team means bringing together a number of different skill sets, which may include software engineering, UX design, security engineering, infrastructure engineering, and customer interaction. Unfortunately, some software engineers consider their work to be more challenging and important than the work of others. They don’t try to understand what team members with different skills do or the problems they face. This leads to tensions as members try to establish a “pecking order” of importance. A successful DevOps team has a culture of mutual respect and sharing. Everyone on the team should be involved in Scrums and other team meetings. Team members should be encouraged to share their expertise with others and to learn new skills. Developers should support the software services that they have developed. If a service fails over a weekend, that developer is responsible for getting it up and running again. If that person is unavailable, however, other team members should take over rather than wait for their return. The team priority should be to fix failures as quickly as possible, rather than to assign blame to a team member or subgroup. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 308 27/09/2020 14:07

## 10.1 ■ Code management 309
Table 10.3 A code management problem Alice and Bob worked for a company called FinanceMadeSimple and were team members involved in developing a personal finance product. Alice discovered a bug in a module called TaxReturnPreparation. The bug was that a tax return was reported as filed but sometimes it was not actually sent to the tax office. She edited the module to fix the bug. Bob was working on the user interface for the system and was also working on TaxReturnPreparation. Unfortunately, he took a copy before Alice had fixed the bug and, after making his changes, he saved the module. This overwrote Alice’s changes, but she was not aware of this. The product tests did not reveal the bug, as it was an intermittent failure that depended on the sections of the tax return form that had been completed. The product was launched with the bug. For most users, everything worked OK. However, for a small number of users, their tax returns were not filed and they were fined by the revenue service. The subsequent investigation showed the software company was negligent. This was widely publicized and, as well as a fine from the tax authorities, users lost confidence in the software. Many switched to a rival product. FinanceMadeSimple failed and both Bob and Alice lost their jobs.
## 10.1 Code management
DevOps depends on the source code management system that is used by the entire team. However, source code management predates DevOps by almost 40 years. The need to manage an evolving codebase was recognized in the early 1970s. Whether or not your team adopts DevOps, managing source code is essential for all types of software engineering. During the development of a software product, the development team will probably create tens of thousands of lines of code and automated tests. These will be organized into hundreds of files. Dozens of libraries may be used, and several different programs may be involved in creating and running the code. Without automated support, it is impossible for developers to keep track of the changes made to the software. Code management1 is a set of software-supported practices used to manage an evolving codebase. You need code management to ensure that changes made by different developers do not interfere with each other and to create different product versions. Code management tools make it easy to create an executable product from its source code files and to run automated tests on that product. To illustrate why code management is important, consider the scenario shown in Table 10.3. If a code management system had been used, it would 1Code management was originally called “software configuration management” and this term is still widely used. However, “configuration management” is now commonly used to refer to the management of a server infrastructure. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 309 27/09/2020 14:07

|  | Continuous integration |

310 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Figure 10.3 Code management and DevOps DevOps automation Continuous Continuous Continuous Infrastructure integration deployment delivery as code Code management system Branching and merging Recover Save and version Code retrieve information repository versions Transfer code $\frac{to}{from}$ developer’s filestore DevOps measurement Data Data Report collection analysis generation have detected the conflict between Bob’s and Alice’s changes, the bug would have been fixed, and the company could have continued in business. Source code management, combined with automated system building, is critical for professional software engineering. In companies that use DevOps, a modern code management system is a fundamental requirement for “automating everything.” Not only does it store the project code that is ultimately deployed, but it also stores all other information that is used in DevOps processes. DevOps automation and measurement tools all interact with the code management system (Figure 10.3). I cover DevOps automation and measurement tools in more detail in Sections 10.2 and 10.3.
### 10.1.1 Fundamentals of source code management
Source code management systems are designed to manage an evolving project codebase to allow different versions of components and entire systems to be stored and retrieved. Developers can work in parallel without interfering with each other and they can integrate their work with that from other developers. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 310 27/09/2020 14:07

## 10.1 ■ Code management 311
The code management system provides a set of features that support four general areas:
# 1. Code transfer Developers take code into their personal file store to work
on it; then they return it to the shared code management system.
# 2. Version storage and retrieval Files may be stored in several different
versions, and specific versions of these files can be retrieved.
# 3. Merging and branching Parallel development branches may be cre-
ated for concurrent working. Changes made by developers in different branches may be merged.
# 4. Version information Information about the different versions maintained
in the system may be stored and retrieved. All source code management systems have the general form shown in Figure 10.3, with a shared repository and a set of features to manage the files in that repository:
# 1. All source code files and file versions are stored in the repository, as are
other artifacts such as configuration files, build scripts, shared libraries, and versions of tools used. The repository includes a database of information about the stored files, such as version information, information about who has changed the files, what changes were made at what times, and so on.
# 2. The source code management features transfer files to and from the repos-
itory and update the information about the different versions of files and their relationships. Specific versions of files and information about these versions can always be retrieved from the repository. Several open-source and proprietary-source code management systems are currently used. All of them provide the features shown in Table 10.4. When files are added, the source code management system assigns a unique identifier to each file. This is used to name stored files; the unique name means that managed files can never be overwritten. Other identifying attributes may be added to the controlled file so that it can be retrieved by name or by using these attributes. Any version of a file can be retrieved from the system. When a change is made to a file and it is submitted to the system, the submitter must add an identifying string that explains the changes made. This helps developers understand why the new version of the file was created. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 311 27/09/2020 14:07

| Feature | Description |
| Version and release identification | Managed versions of a code file are uniquely identified when they are submitted to the system and can be retrieved using their identifier and other file attributes. |
| Change history recording | The reasons changes to a code file have been made are recorded and maintained. |
| Independent development | Several developers can work on the same code file at the same time. When this is submitted to the code management system, a new version is created so that files are never overwritten by later changes. |
| Project support | All of the files associated with a project may be checked out at the same time. There is no need to check out files one at a time. |
| Storage management | The code management system includes efficient storage mechanisms so that it doesn’t keep multiple copies of files that have only small differences. |

312 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Table 10.4 Features of source code management systems Version and release Managed versions of a code file are uniquely identified identification when they are submitted to the system and can be retrieved using their identifier and other file attributes. Change history recording The reasons changes to a code file have been made are recorded and maintained. Independent development Several developers can work on the same code file at the same time. When this is submitted to the code management system, a new version is created so that files are never overwritten by later changes. Project support All of the files associated with a project may be checked out at the same time. There is no need to check out files one at a time. Storage management The code management system includes efficient storage mechanisms so that it doesn’t keep multiple copies of files that have only small differences. Code management systems support independent development when several developers work on the same file simultaneously. They submit changes to the code management system, which creates a new version of the file for each submission. This avoids the file overwriting problem that I described in Table 10.3. It is common for different projects to share components, so code management systems also provide some form of project support. Project support features allow users to retrieve all the versions of files that are relevant to the project that they are working on. High storage costs were an important driver for the development of code management systems in the 1970s. Rather than storing every version of a file, storage compaction reduced the space required for the set of files being managed. These systems stored a version as a list of changes from a master version of a file. The version file could be recreated by applying these changes to the master file. If several versions of a file had been created, it was relatively slow to recreate a specific version, as this involved retrieving and applying several sets of code edits. As storage is now cheap and plentiful, modern code management systems are less concerned with optimizing storage. They use faster mechanisms for version storage and retrieval. Early source code management systems had a centralized repository architecture that requires users to check in and check out files (Figure 10.4). If a user checks out a file, anyone else who tries to check out that file is warned M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 312 27/09/2020 14:07

|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|  |  |  | A1.1 |  |  |  | B1.1 |  |  | C1.1 |  |  |  |  | X1.0 |  |  | B1.1 |  |  | Z1.0 |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  | Z1.0 |  |  |  |  |  |  | C1.2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Y1.1 |  |  | C1.1 |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | B |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | check_in check_out |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | A1.0 |  |  |  | B1.0 |  |  | C1.0 |  |  |  | X1.0 |  |  |  | Y1.0 |  |  |  | P1.0 |  |  | Z1.0 |  |  |  |
|  | A1.1 |  |  |  | B1.1 |  |  | C1.1 |  |  |  | X1.1 |  |  |  | Y1.1 |  |  |  | Q1.0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | C1.2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | R1.0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |

## 10.1 ■ Code management 313
Figure 10.4 Centralized source code management Alice Bob check_out check_in check_out check_in Code management server that it is already in use. When the edited file is checked in, a new version of that file is created. In Figure 10.4, both Alice and Bob have checked out the files they need from the repository. Both have checked out B1.1, C1.1, and Z1.0. These are marked in the repository as shared. When Alice and Bob check in these files, the source code management system ensures that file copies do not conflict. This centralized architecture was the dominant model for code management systems for more than 30 years and is still used in some code management systems. Subversion is the best-known, open-source code management product that is based around a centralized repository. However, distributed code management systems are now the most commonly used code management systems for software product development. In these systems, the repository is replicated on each developer’s computer. In 2005, Linus Torvalds, the developer of Linux, revolutionized source code management by developing a distributed version control system (DVCS) called Git to manage the code of the Linux kernel. Git was geared to supporting large-scale open-source development. It took advantage of the fact that storage costs had fallen to such an extent that most users did not have to be concerned with local storage management. Instead of only keeping the copies of the files that users are working on, Git maintains a clone of the repository on every user’s computer (Figure 10.5). A fundamental concept in Git is the “master branch,” which is the current master version of the software that the team is working on. You create new versions by creating a new branch, as I explain below. In Figure 10.5, you can M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 313 27/09/2020 14:07

| Master branch Branch 1 F1 $F^2$ $F^3$ F4 F5 F6 F7 F9 F21 F7 F8 F9 F10 F11 F12 F13 F14 F15 Branch 2 F16 F17 F18 F19 F20 F21 F22 F23 $F^2$ $F^3$ F24 F25 F26 F27 Commit and branch information |  |  |  |
|  | Commit and branch information |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
| Branch 1 |
| F7 F9 F21 |
|  | $F^2$ $F^3$ |
| Master branch F1 $F^2$ $F^3$ F4 F5 F6 F7 F8 F9 F10 F11 F12 F13 F14 F15 F16 F17 F18 F19 F20 F21 F22 F23 F24 F25 F26 F27 Commit and branch information |  |  |
|  | Commit and branch information |  |

314 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Figure 10.5 Repository cloning in Git Shared Git repository Master branch Branch 1 F1 $F^2$ $F^3$ F4 F5 F6 F7 F9 F21 F12 F13 F14 F15 Branch 2 F20 F21 F22 F23 $F^2$ $F^3$ Clone Alice’s repository F1 $F^2$ $F^3$ F4 F5 F6 F12 F13 F14 F15 F20 F21 F22 F23 see that two branches have been created in addition to the master branch. When users request a repository clone, they get a copy of the master branch that they can work on independently. Git and other distributed code management systems have several advantages over centralized systems:
# 1. Resilience Everyone working on a project has their own copy of the
repository. If the shared repository is damaged or subjected to a cyberattack, work can continue, and the clones can be used to restore the shared repository. People can work offline if they don’t have a network connection.
# 2. Speed Committing changes to the repository is a fast, local operation and
does not need data to be transferred over the network. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 314 27/09/2020 14:07

## 10.1 ■ Code management 315
Figure 10.6 Git repositories Project 1 Project 2 RP1a RP1c RP2p RP2a RP1b RP1d RP2r RP1 RP2 Github RP3 RP4 Project 4 Project 3 RP3a RP3c RP4j RP4k RP3b RP3f
# 3. Flexibility Local experimentation is much simpler. Developers can safely
try different approaches without exposing their experiments to other project members. With a centralized system, this may only be possible by working outside the code management system. Most software product companies now use Git for code management. For teamwork, Git is organized around the notion of a shared project repository and private clones of that repository held on each developer’s computer (Figure 10.6). A company may use its own server to run the project repository. However, many companies and individual developers use an external Git repository provider. Several Git repository hosting companies, such as Github and G itlab, host thousands of repositories on the cloud. In the examples here, I use Github as the shared repository. Figure 10.6 shows four project repositories on Github, RP1–RP4. RP1 is the repository for project 1, RP2 is the repository for project 2, and so on. Each of the developers on each project is identified by a letter (a, b, c, etc.) and has an individual copy of the project repository. Developers may work on more than one project at a time, so they may have copies of several Git repositories on their computer. For example, developer a works on Project 1, Project 2, and Project 3, so has clones of RP1, RP2, and RP3. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 315 27/09/2020 14:07

316 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management
### 10.1.2 Using Git
When you join a project, you set up a project directory on your computer that acts as your workspace for that project. If necessary, you install the same versions of tools (including Git) that your team uses. As you work in the project directory, the following sequence of commands sets up a local Git repository, often called a repo, in that directory. The local project directory is then cloned from a remote repo. cd myproject git init #Sets up the local repo in the project directory called myproject git clone <URL of external repository> The clone command copies the master files from the remote repository to the working directory. These are usually the most recent versions of the project files. It also copies the repository information from the external repository so that you can see what other developers have done. You can query this information and download other branches from the project repo if you need them. You can then start to work on the files in your project directory, adding new files and making changes as required. To update your local repo, you use the add and commit commands. The list of files in the add command are those files that you want to manage. The commit command adds these files to the local repo after you have made changes to them. git add <list of files to be controlled> To work with Git, you need to understand the concepts of branching and merging, which are the features that allow developers to work on the same files without interference. Branching and merging are fundamental ideas that are supported by all code management systems. A branch is an independent, stand-alone version that is created when a developer wishes to change a file. The changes made by developers in their own branches may be merged to create a new shared branch. The repository ensures that branch files that have been changed cannot overwrite repository files without a merge operation. Let’s assume that Alice and Bob are working on the same file in the Git repo. To make their changes, each creates a branch for working on a copy of M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 316 27/09/2020 14:07

## 10.1 ■ Code management 317
Figure 10.7 Branching and merging Feature experiment branch Alice Merge Bob Bug fix branch that file (Figure 10.7). Alice is working on a new experimental feature, and Bob is working on a bug fix. If Alice or Bob make mistakes on the branch they are working on, they can easily revert to the master file. If they commit changes while working, they can revert to earlier versions of the work they have done. When they have finished and tested their code, they can replace the master file by merging the work they have done with the master branch. Figure 10.7 shows that Bob has merged his bug fix with the master branch. Bob and Alice work with their local repos and there are no conflicts between them. At some stage, however, both of them may try to update the external repository with their changed files. Let’s assume Bob is first to update the external repo. He merges the changed files and pushes the changes to the shared repo. His update is accepted. Alice then tries to push her changes to the repo, but they are rejected because of the possible conflict with Bob’s changes. Git compares versions of files on a line-by-line basis. There is no conflict if developers have changed different lines in the file. If they have made changes to the same lines, however, then a merge conflict is signaled. Git highlights the lines where the conflict occurs, and it is up to the developers to resolve these conflicts. In this example, Alice should talk with Bob about his changes and then make changes to the files to resolve the conflict. Git is very efficient in managing branches, so it makes sense to use this mechanism even when you are making small changes to your code. To create a new branch based on the files in your working directory, you use the c heckout command with a -b flag. The command below creates a new branch called fix-header-format git checkout -b fix-header-format M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 317 27/09/2020 14:07

318 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Let’s assume this involves editing two files: report_printer.py and generate_ header.py. You make the edits to these files, add them, and commit. git add report_printer.py generate_header.py The commit command defaults to committing the changes to the current branch, which is fix-header-format. You then decide that you are happy with the changes that you have made and want to merge them with the master branch in your directory. You check out the master branch from the project repo to make sure that you have the most recent version of all master files and then issue a merge command: git checkout master git merge fix-header-format At this stage, you have updated the master branch in your local repository but not the external repository. To incorporate the changes that you have made in the master branch of the external repository, you use a push command: git push Git then examines your repo and the external repo, works out what files have changed, and pushes the changes to the external repo. Although I do not shown this here, you can push to specific branches on the external repo. In the Alice and Bob scenario, Bob issues a push command to push his changed files to the external repo. Alice tries to push her changes, but Git rejects them because it knows that Bob has already issued a push command with possible conflicts. Alice must then update her repository with Bob’s changes using a pull command: git pull The pull command fetches a copy of the files that includes Bob’s changes from the master in the external repo. It updates Alice’s local repo with these files. Alice then works on fixing the potential conflict and then pushes the updated branch to the external repo. Git was originally developed to support open-source software development. In the open-source model, many different people can work independently on the code without any knowledge of what others are doing. The master version of the open-source software is managed by an individual or M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 318 27/09/2020 14:07

| Alice’s Github repository |  |  |  |
|  |  | 3 |  |
|  | Alice’s private repository |  |  |
| Github project repository |  |
|  | 5 |
| Charlie’s private repository |  |

## 10.1 ■ Code management 319
Figure 10.8 Using Github for open-source development Alice’s Github 1 Github project 1 Bob’s Github 3 5 3 2 4 4 2 Alice’s private Charlie’s private Bob’s private Alice Charlie Bob small group that decides what changes should be incorporated. Figure 10.8 shows how Git and GitHub can support this way of working. Alice and Bob are both making their own changes to the open-source software. Each has a repository on Github as well as a private repository on their own computer. The master repository for the open-source project is held on Github and is managed by Charlie. Charlie is responsible for deciding whether changes made by developers should be incorporated into the master. This is the sequence of actions involved in updating the master version of an open-source project:
# 1. Alice and Bob copy the master branch from the project repository on
Github into their personal Github repositories.
# 2. They pull their shared public repo to their private repos and complete
their changes to the code.
# 3. They push these changes to their public repos and tell Charlie about the
changes they have made.
# 4. Charlie pulls the changes from Alice’s and Bob’s repos into his private
repo. He examines and checks the work, runs tests if necessary, and decides whether it should be included in the open-source system.
# 5. If the software changes are acceptable, Charlie pushes these changes from
his private repo to the definitive project repo. Github uses a very general mechanism called Webhooks to trigger actions in response to an update to the project repository. Webhooks sends data, using M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 319 27/09/2020 14:07

320 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management an HTTP POST request, to a URL when some action occurs. Therefore, you can configure Github to send messages to developers about changes and to trigger a system build and test when new code is added. This feature is used to communicate with external tools such as the DevOps automation tools that I cover in the next section.
## 10.2 DevOps automation
Historically, the processes of integrating a system from independently developed parts, deploying that system in a realistic testing environment, and releasing it were time-consuming and expensive. By using DevOps with automated support, however, you can dramatically reduce the time and costs for integration, deployment, and delivery. “Everything that can be should be automated” is a fundamental principle of DevOps. In addition to reducing the costs and time required for integration, deployment, and delivery, automation makes these processes more reliable and reproducible. Automation information is encoded in scripts and system models that can be checked, reviewed, versioned, and stored in the project repository. Deployment does not depend on a system manager who knows the server configurations. A specific server configuration can be quickly and reliably reproduced using the system model. Figure 10.3 showed the four aspects of DevOps automation. I explain these in Table 10.5. Another area of automation that I think is important is the automation of issue tracking. Issue and bug tracking involves recording observed problems and the development team’s responses to these problems. If you use Scrum or a Scrum-like process, these issues should be automatically added to the product backlog. Several open-source and proprietary issue-tracking tools are widely used, such as Bugzilla, FogBugz, and JIRA. These systems include the following features:
# 1. Issue reporting Users and testers can report an issue or a bug and provide
further information about the context where the problem was discovered. These reports can be sent automatically to developers. Developers can comment on the report and indicate if and when the issue has been resolved. Reports are stored in an issue database. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 320 27/09/2020 14:07

| Aspect | Description |
| Continuous integration | Each time a developer commits a change to the project’s master branch, an executable version of the system is built and tested. |
| Continuous delivery | A simulation of the product’s operating environment is created and the executable software version is tested. |
| Continuous deployment | A new release of the system is made available to users every time a change is made to the master branch of the software. |
| Infrastructure as code | Machine-readable models of the infrastructure (network, servers, routers, etc.) on which the product executes are used by configuration management tools to build the software’s execution platform. The software to be installed, such as compilers and libraries and a DBMS, are included in the infastructure model. |

## 10.2 ■ DevOps automation 321
Table 10.5 Aspects of DevOps automation Continuous integration Each time a developer commits a change to the project’s master branch, an executable version of the system is built and tested. Continuous delivery A simulation of the product’s operating environment is created and the executable software version is tested. Continuous deployment A new release of the system is made available to users every time a change is made to the master branch of the Infrastructure as code Machine-readable models of the infrastructure (network, servers, routers, etc.) on which the product executes are used by configuration management tools to build the software’s execution platform. The software to be installed, such as compilers and libraries and a DBMS, are included in the infastructure model.
# 2. Searching and querying The issue database may be searched and queried.
This is important to discover whether issues have already been raised, to discover unresolved issues, and to find out if related issues have been reported.
# 3. Data analysis The issue database can be analyzed and information
extracted, such as the number of unresolved issues, the rate of issue resolution, and so on. This is often presented graphically in a system dashboard.
# 4. Integration with source code management Issue reports can be linked to
versions of software components stored in the code management system. I do not go into any more details about issue-tracking tools, but it is essential for DevOps to use automated issue tracking. The issue-tracking system captures data about the use of a software product that can be analyzed in conjunction with other data in a DevOps measurement system.
### 10.2.1 Continuous integration
System integration (system building) is the process of gathering all of the elements required in a working system, moving them into the right directories, and putting them together to create an operational system. This involves more M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 321 27/09/2020 14:07

| COMPILE |
| AND BUILD |
| TEST |

322 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Figure 10.9 Continuous integration Source code files Database Executable from code management files tests Executable Deployable system system GET TEST Libraries Configuration files Trigger from repo than compiling the system. You usually have to complete several other steps to create a working system. Although every product is different, the following typical activities are part of the system integration process: ■■ installing database software and setting up the database with the appropriate schema; ■■ loading test data into the database; ■■ compiling the files that make up the product; ■■ linking the compiled code with the libraries and other components used; ■■ checking that the external services used are operational; ■■ deleting old configuration files and moving configuration files to the correct locations; ■■ running a set of system tests to check that the integration has been successful. If a system is infrequently integrated, many of the system’s components are changed, sometimes significantly, between integrations. When problems are discovered, they are often difficult to isolate, and fixing them slows down the system development. To avoid this problem, the developers of the Extreme Programming method suggested that continuous integration should be used. Continuous integration simply means that an integrated version of the system is created and tested every time a change is pushed to the system’s shared code repository. On completion of the push operation, the repository sends a message to an integration server to build a new version of the product (Figure 10.9). M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 322 27/09/2020 14:07

| Commit changes |
| to local repo |
| Pull changes |
| to master branch |
|  | Compile and build system |
| Test |
| system |

## 10.2 ■ DevOps automation 323
Figure 10.10 Local integration From project repo Make changes Commit changes Pull changes Merge master to code to local repo to master branch with local repo Compile and Test Push code build system system to project repo success The squares in Figure 10.9 are the elements of a continuous integration pipeline that is triggered by a repository notification that a change has been made to the master branch of the system. In a continuous integration environment, developers have to make sure that they don’t “break the build.” Breaking the build means pushing code to the project repository, which when integrated, causes some of the system tests to fail. This holds up other developers. If this happens to you, your priority is to discover and fix the problem so that normal development can continue. To avoid breaking the build, you should always adopt an “integrate twice” approach to system integration. You should integrate and test on your own computer before pushing code to the project repository to trigger the integration server (Figure 10.10). The advantage of continuous integration compared to less frequent integration is that it is faster to find and fix bugs in the system. If you make a small change and some system tests then fail, the problem almost certainly lies in the new code that you have pushed to the project repo. You can focus on this code to find the bug that’s causing the problem. If you continuously integrate, then a working system is always available to the whole team. This can be used to test ideas and to demonstrate the features of the system to management and customers. Furthermore, continuous integration creates a “quality culture” in a development team. Team members want to avoid the stigma and disruption of breaking the build. They are likely to check their work carefully before pushing it to the project repo. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 323 27/09/2020 14:07

324 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Figure 10.11 A dependency model Program source Test source Program object Test object Test execution Continuous integration is effective only if the integration process is fast and developers do not have to wait for the results of their tests of the integrated system. However, some activities in the build process, such as populating a database or compiling hundreds of system files, are inherently slow. It is therefore essential to have an automated build process that minimizes the time spent on these activities. Fast automated building is possible because, in a continuous integration system, the changes made to the system between one integration and another are usually relatively small. Usually this means that only a few source code files have been changed. Code integration tools use an incremental build process so that they only have to repeat actions, such as compilation, if the dependent files have been changed. To understand incremental system building, you need to understand the concept of dependencies. Figure 10.11 is a dependency model that shows the dependencies for test execution. An upward-pointing arrow means “depends on” and shows the information required to complete the task shown in the rectangle at the base of the model. Figure 10.11 therefore shows that running a set of system tests depends on the existence of executable object code for both the program being tested and the system tests. In turn, these depend on the source code for the system and the tests that are compiled to create the object code. The first time you integrate a system, the incremental build system compiles all the source code files and executable test files. It creates their object code equivalents, and the executable tests are run. Subsequently, however, object code files are created only for new and modified tests and for source code files that have been modified. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 324 27/09/2020 14:07

## 10.2 ■ DevOps automation 325
Figure 10.12 File dependencies Lib 1 Lib 2 Classdef (compiled) Mycode (source) Mycode (compiled) Figure 10.12 is a lower-level dependency model that shows the dependencies involved in creating the object code for a source code file called Mycode. Source code files are rarely independent but rely on other information such as libraries. Mycode depends on two libraries (Lib 1 and Lib 2) and an externally defined class definition. An automated build system uses the specification of dependencies to work out what needs to be done. It uses the file modification timestamp to decide whether a source code file has been changed after the associated object code file was created. If so, the source code must be recompiled. To illustrate this, consider three scenarios based on Figure 10.12:
# 1. The modification date of the compiled code is later than the modification
date of the source code. The build system infers that no changes have been made to the source code and does nothing.
# 2. The modification date of the compiled code is earlier than the modifica-
tion date of the compiled code. The build system recompiles the source and replaces the existing file of compiled code with an updated version.
# 3. The modification date of the compiled code is later than the modification
date of the source code. However, the modification date of Classdef is later than the modification date of the source code of Mycode. Therefore, Mycode has to be recompiled to incorporate these changes. Manually recording file dependencies is a tedious and time-consuming task. For most programming languages, however, either the compiler or a separate tool can automatically create a dependency model that can be used for system building. The system building software uses the model when it builds the system to optimize the build process. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 325 27/09/2020 14:07

326 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management The oldest and perhaps best known system building tool is make, which was originally developed in the 1970s for Unix. System building commands are written as a shell script. Other tools such as Ant and Maven, which are Java oriented, and Rake, which is Ruby oriented, use different approaches to specify dependencies, but all basically do the same thing. Tools that support the entire continuous integration process allow you to define an activity pipeline, such as that shown in Figure 10.9, and execute that pipeline. In addition to building the system, they can populate the database, run automated tests, and so on. Examples of continuous integration tools include Jenkins, a widely used open-source system, and proprietary products such as Travis and Bamboo.
### 10.2.2 Continuous delivery and deployment
Continuous integration (CI) means creating an executable version of a software system whenever a change is made to the repository. The CI tool is triggered when a file is pushed to the repo. It builds the system and runs tests on your development computer or project integration server. However, the real environment in which software runs will inevitably be different from your development system. The production server may have a different filesystem organization, different access permissions, and different installed applications. Consequently, when your software runs in its real operational environment, bugs may be revealed that did not show up in the test environment. Continuous delivery means that, after making changes to a system, you ensure that the changed system is ready for delivery to customers. This means that you have to test it in a production environment to make sure that environmental factors do not cause system failures or slow down its performance. As well as feature tests, you should run load tests that show how the software behaves as the number of users increases. You may also run tests to check the throughput of transactions and your system’s response time. The simplest way to create a replica of a production environment is to run your software in a container, as I explained in Chapter 5. Your production environment is defined as a container, so to create a test environment, you simply create another container using the same image. This ensures that changes made to the production environment are always reflected in the test environment. Continuous delivery does not mean that the software will necessarily be released immediately to users for deployment. When to do this is a business decision, and there may be good reasons to delay, as I explain later in this section. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 326 27/09/2020 14:07

|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|  | Configure test server |  |  | Install system on test server |  |  | Run acceptance tests |  |  |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|  | Install software on production servers |  |  | Switch operation to new software |  |

## 10.2 ■ DevOps automation 327
Figure 10.13 Continuous delivery and deployment Required Tested Test software system set Configure Install system Run acceptance test server on test server tests Continuous delivery Install software on Switch operation to production servers new software Continuous deployment In the last few years, however, more and more companies have adopted continuous deployment, where a system is deployed as a cloud service after every change is made. I explained the continuous deployment process for microservices in Chapter 6 and showed the continuous deployment pipeline in Figure 6.16. Figure 10.13 illustrates a summarized version of this deployment pipeline, showing the stages involved in continuous delivery and deployment. After initial integration testing, a staged test environment is created. This is a replica of the actual production environment in which the system will run. The system acceptance tests, which include functionality, load, and performance tests, are then run to check that the software works as expected. If all of these tests pass, the changed software is installed on the production servers. To deploy the system, you transfer the software and required data to the production servers. You then momentarily stop all new requests for service and leave the older version to process the outstanding transactions. Once these have been completed, you switch to the new version of the system and restart processing. Table 10.6 shows the benefits of using continuous deployment for product companies. Continuous deployment is obviously only practical for cloud-based systems. If your product is sold through an app store or downloaded from your website, continuous integration and delivery make sense. A working version is always available for release. If you update the downloadable version M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 327 27/09/2020 14:07

| Reduced costs | If you use continuous deployment, you have no option but to invest in a completely automated deployment pipeline. Manual deployment is a time-consuming and error-prone process. Setting up an automated system is expensive and takes time, but you can recover these costs quickly if you make regular updates to your product. |
| Faster problem solving | If a problem occurs, it will probably affect only a small part of the system and the source of that problem will be obvious. If you bundle many changes into a single release, finding and fixing problems are more difficult. |
| Faster customer feedback | You can deploy new features when they are ready for customer use. You can ask them for feedback on these features and use this feedback to identify improvements that you need to make. |
| $\frac{A}{B}$ testing | This is an option if you have a large customer base and use several servers for deployment. You can deploy a new version of the software on some servers and leave the older version running on others. You then use the load balancer to divert some customers to the new version while others use the older version. You can measure and assess how new features are used to see if they do what you expect. |

328 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Table 10.6 Benefits of continuous deployment Reduced costs If you use continuous deployment, you have no option but to invest in a completely automated deployment pipeline. Manual deployment is a time-consuming and error-prone process. Setting up an automated system is expensive and takes time, but you can recover these costs quickly if you make regular updates to your product. Faster problem solving If a problem occurs, it will probably affect only a small part of the system and the source of that problem will be obvious. If you bundle many changes into a single release, finding and fixing problems are more difficult. Faster customer feedback You can deploy new features when they are ready for customer use. You can ask them for feedback on these features and use this feedback to identify improvements that you need to make. $\frac{A}{B}$ testing This is an option if you have a large customer base and use several servers for deployment. You can deploy a new version of the software on some servers and leave the older version running on others. You then use the load balancer to divert some customers to the new version while others use the older version. You can measure and assess how new features are used to see if they do what you expect. regularly, your customers can decide when to update the software on their computers or mobile devices. It is sometimes helpful to provide an autoupdate feature, so that users don’t have to do anything. Many users dislike this, however, and you should always allow this feature to be disabled. There are three business reasons you may not want to deploy every software change to customers:
# 1. You may have incomplete features available that could be deployed, but
you want to avoid giving competitors information about these features until their implementation is complete.
# 2. Customers may be irritated by software that is continually changing, espe-
cially if this affects the user interface. They don’t want to spend time continually learning about new features. Rather, they prefer to have a number of new features available before learning about them.
# 3. You may wish to synchronize releases of your software with known
business cycles. For example, if your product is aimed at the education M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 328 27/09/2020 14:07

## 10.2 ■ DevOps automation 329
market, your customers want stability at the start of their academic year when they are registering new students, setting up courses, and other start-of-year tasks. They are unlikely to try new features at that time. It makes more sense to release features to these customers when they have time to experiment with the new system. CI tools such as Jenkins and Travis may also be used to support continuous delivery and deployment. These tools can integrate with infrastructure configuration management tools such as Chef and Puppet to implement software deployment. However, for cloud-based software, it is often simpler to use containers in conjunction with CI tools rather than use infrastructure configuration management software.
### 10.2.3 Infrastructure as code
In an enterprise environment, there are usually many different physical or virtual servers (web servers, database servers, file servers, etc.) that do different things. These have different configurations and run different software packages. Some may have to be updated when new versions of software become available; others may have to be kept stable because legacy software depends on older versions of installed software. It is difficult to keep track of the software installed on each machine. Emergency changes, such as security updates, may have to be made, and the system administrators don’t always have time to document these changes. Server documentation is often out of date. Consequently, manually maintaining a computing infrastructure with tens or hundreds of servers is expensive and error-prone. The idea of infrastructure as code was proposed as a way to address this problem. Rather than manually updating the software on a company’s servers, the process can be automated using a model of the infrastructure written in a machine-processable language. Configuration management (CM) tools, such as Puppet and Chef, can automatically install software and services on servers according to the infrastructure definition. The CM tool accesses a master copy of the software to be installed and pushes this to the servers being provisioned (Figure 10.14). When changes have to be made, the infrastructure model is updated and the CM tool makes the change to all servers. Defining your software infrastructure as code is obviously relevant to products that are delivered as services. The product provider has to manage the infrastructure of their services on the cloud. However, it is also relevant if software is delivered through downloads. In this case, you have to test the M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 329 27/09/2020 14:07

| S1 |
| $S^2$ |
| $S^3$ |
| S4 |
| CM tool |
| Software to be installed |

330 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Figure 10.14 Infrastructure as code Servers Infrastructure definition Software to be $S^3$, S4: installed $S^3$ software in several contexts to ensure that it does not react adversely with the buyer’s infrastructure. You can do this by defining several test infrastructures and defining each of them. Defining your infrastructure as code and using a configuration management system solve two key problems of continuous deployment:
# 1. Your testing environment must be exactly the same as your deployment
environment. If you change the deployment environment, you have to mirror those changes in your testing environment.
# 2. When you change a service, you have to be able to roll that change out to
all of your servers quickly and reliably. If there is a bug in your changed code that affects the system’s reliability, you have to be able to seamlessly roll back to the older system. The business benefits of defining your infrastructure as code are lower costs of system management and lower risks of unexpected problems arising when infrastructure changes are implemented. These benefits stem from four fundamental characteristics of infrastructure as code, shown in Table 10.7. As I explained in Chapter 5, the best way to deploy many cloud-based services is to use containers. A container provides a stand-alone execution environment that runs on top of an operating system such as Linux. The software installed in a Docker container is specified using a Dockerfile, which is essentially a definition of your software infrastructure as code. You build an executable container image by processing the Dockerfile. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 330 27/09/2020 14:07

| Characteristic | Explanation |
| Visibility | Your infrastructure is defined as a stand-alone model that can be read, discussed, understood, and reviewed by the whole DevOps team. |
| Reproducibility | Using a configuration management tool means that the installation tasks will always be run in the same sequence so that the same environment is always created. You are not reliant on people remembering the order that they need to do things. |
| Reliability | In managing a complex infrastructure, system administrators often make simple mistakes, especially when the same changes have to be made to several servers. Automating the process avoids these mistakes. |
| Recovery | Like any other code, your infrastructure model can be versioned and stored in a code management system. If infrastructure changes cause problems, you can easily revert to an older version and reinstall the environment that you know works. |

## 10.3 ■ DevOps measurement 331
Table 10.7 Characteristics of infrastructure as code Visibility Your infrastructure is defined as a stand-alone model that can be read, discussed, understood, and reviewed by the whole DevOps team. Reproducibility Using a configuration management tool means that the installation tasks will always be run in the same sequence so that the same environment is always created. You are not reliant on people remembering the order that they need to do things. Reliability In managing a complex infrastructure, system administrators often make simple mistakes, especially when the same changes have to be made to several servers. Automating the process avoids these mistakes. Recovery Like any other code, your infrastructure model can be versioned and stored in a code management system. If infrastructure changes cause problems, you can easily revert to an older version and reinstall the environment that you know works. Using containers makes it very simple to provide identical execution environments. For each type of server you use, you define the environment that you need and build an image for execution. You can run an application container as a test system or as an operational system; there is no distinction between them. When you update your software, you rerun the image creation process to create a new image that includes the modified software. You can then start these images alongside the existing system and divert service requests to them. Cloud-based products usually have fewer server types (e.g., web servers, database servers, application servers) than enterprise systems. However, you may have to provision new servers in response to increasing demand and then shut down servers at quieter times. You can define containers for each type of server and use a container management system, such as Kubernetes, to deploy and manage these containers.
## 10.3 DevOps measurement
After you have adopted DevOps, you should try to continuously improve your DevOps process to achieve faster deployment of better-quality software. This means you need to have a measurement program in place in M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 331 27/09/2020 14:07

332 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management which you collect and analyze product and process data. By making measurements over time, you can judge whether or not you have an effective and improving process. Measurements about software development and use fall into four categories:
# 1. Process measurements You collect and analyze data about your develop-
ment, testing, and deployment processes.
# 2. Service measurements You collect and analyze data about the software’s
performance, reliability, and acceptability to customers.
# 3. Usage measurements You collect and analyze data about how customers
use your product.
# 4. Business success measurements You collect and analyze data about how
your product contributes to the overall success of the business. Process measurements and service measurements are the most relevant types for DevOps. Usage measurements help you identify issues and problems with the software itself. Some people think that business success measurements should also be defined and measured. However, as I explain later, I think these are unreliable and I am not convinced that they are worthwhile. Measurement of software and its development is a complex process. You have to identify the metrics that are likely to give you useful insights and find reliable ways of collecting and analyzing metrics data. It is sometimes impossible to measure what you really want to measure directly (such as customer satisfaction). You therefore have to make inferences from other metrics (such as the number of returning customers) that you can collect. As far as possible, the DevOps principle of automating everything should be applied to software measurement. You should instrument your software to collect data about itself, and you should use a monitoring system, as I explained in Chapter 6, to collect data about your software’s performance and availability. Some process measurements can also be automated. There are problems in process measurement, however, because people are involved. Different people work in different ways, may record information differently, and are affected by outside influences on the way they work. For example, it may seem simple to record the lead time from the start of development of a change proposal to the deployment of the code implementing that change. However, what does “lead time” mean? Does it mean elapsed time or the time spent by the developer working on the M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 332 27/09/2020 14:07

## 10.3 ■ DevOps measurement 333
problem? What assumptions are made about normal working hours? Do some changes have higher priority than others so that work on one change is stopped to implement another? There are no simple answers to these questions, which means that process metrics are never simple to collect and analyze. Many articles on DevOps measurement make the point that you should link process and product measurements to business success measurements. They suggest that improvement to your DevOps process leads to a more successful business. This sounds fine in principle, but I think that linking DevOps measurements to business performance indicators is idealistic and impractical. Many factors contribute to business success, and it is practically impossible to isolate the contribution of DevOps. For example, a business may be more successful because it has introduced DevOps. Alternatively, the success may be due to better managers who have introduced changes, including the use of DevOps. I believe you should accept that DevOps is worth doing and then focus on collecting process and performance metrics that you can use to improve your software delivery and deployment process. Payal Chakravarty from IBM suggests a very practical approach to DevOps measurement.2 Based on a goal of shipping code frequently without causing customer outages, she suggests the use of a metrics scorecard based on nine metrics that are fairly easy to collect. These are relevant to software that is delivered as a cloud service. They include process metrics and service metrics, as shown in Figure 10.15. For the process metrics, you would like to see decreases in the number of failed deployments, the mean time to recovery after a service failure, and the lead time from development to deployment. You would hope to see increases in the deployment frequency and the number of lines of changed code that are shipped. For the service metrics, availability and performance should be stable or improving, the number of customer complaints should be decreasing, and the number of new customers should be increasing. Chakravarty suggests that the collected data should be analyzed weekly and presented in a single screen that shows performance in the current and previous weeks. You can also use a graphical presentation that is better for seeing long-term trends. Figure 10.16 shows examples of this trend analysis. 2Payal Chakravarty, “The DevOps Scorecard,” 2014, https://devops.$\frac{com}{devops}$-scorecard/ M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 333 27/09/2020 14:07

334 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management Figure 10.15 Metrics used in the DevOps scorecard Process metrics Deployment Change frequency volume Percentage of Lead time from failed deployments development to deployment Mean time to DevOps recovery metrics Percentage increase in customer numbers Performance Number of customer complaints Service metrics Figure 10.16 Metrics trends Deployment frequency Number of customer complaints 1 2 3 4 5 Weeks M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 334 27/09/2020 14:07

| Log 1 |
| Log 2 |
| Log 3 |

## 10.3 ■ DevOps measurement 335
Figure 10.17 Logging and analysis Executing Log software analyzer Metrics dashboard You can see from Figure 10.16 that the availability is roughly stable over time and the deployment frequency is increasing. The number of customer complaints is more variable. The jump in week 2 suggests that there were problems with one of the system releases that week. However, the overall trend indicates a small improvement over time. To collect these data, you may use several different tools. Continuous integration tools such as Jenkins can collect data about deployments, successful tests, and so on. Cloud providers often have monitoring software, such as Cloudwatch from Amazon, that can provide data on availability and performance. You can collect customer-supplied data from an issue management system. As well as using these tools, you may add instrumentation to your product to gather data on its performance and how it is used by customers. By analyzing these data, you gain insights into what customers really do, rather than what you expect them to do, and you identify parts of your software that need improvement. The most practical way of doing this is to use log files, where the entries in the log are timestamped events reflecting customer actions $\frac{and}{or}$ software responses (Figure 10.17). To be useful, you have to log as many events as possible, which means that the logging software may be recording hundreds of events per second. Various log analysis tools are available to manage these data in the cloud and analyze them to create useful information about how your software is used. These may present information using a metrics dashboard that shows the data that have been analyzed and how they are changing over time. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 335 27/09/2020 14:07

336 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management ■■ DevOps is the integration of software development and the management of that software once it has been deployed for use. The same team is responsible for development, deployment, and software support. ■■ The benefits of DevOps are faster deployment, reduced risk, faster repair of buggy code, and more productive teams. ■■ Source code management is essential to avoid changes made by different developers interfering with each other. ■■ All code management systems are based around a shared code repository with a set of features that support code transfer, version storage and retrieval, branching and merging, and maintaining version information. ■■ Git is a distributed code management system that is the most widely used system for software product development. Each developer works with their own copy of the repository, which may be merged with the shared project repository. ■■ Continuous integration means that as soon as a change is committed to a project repository, it is integrated with existing code and a new version of the system is created for testing. ■■ Automated system building tools reduce the time needed to compile and integrate the system by recompiling only those components and their dependents that have changed. ■■ Continuous deployment means that as soon as a change is made, the deployed version of the system is automatically updated. This is only possible when the software product is delivered as a cloud-based service. ■■ Infrastructure as code means that the infrastructure (network, installed software, etc.) on which software executes is defined as a machine-readable model. Automated tools, such as Chef and Puppet, can provision servers based on the infrastructure model. ■■ Measurement is a fundamental principle of DevOps. You may make both process and product measurements. Important process metrics are deployment frequency, percentage of failed deployments, and mean time to recovery from failure. “What Is DevOps?” This blog post, written as DevOps was just starting to be used, is a thoughtful explanation of what DevOps means. It does not go into detail but encapsulates the essence of DevOps. (E. Mueller, 2010) https://theagileadmin.$\frac{com}{what-is}$-dev/ M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 336 27/09/2020 14:07

Exercises 337 “Why Git for Your Organization” This blog post discusses how Git is not just a system that benefits developers but also has wider organizational applicability with benefits for marketing, product management, customer support, and so on. (Atlassian, undated) https://www.atlassian.com/git/$\frac{tutorials}{why-git}$ “Continuous Integration” This is quite an old post by one of the pioneers of continuous integration, but I think it is one of the best overviews of the topic. It’s clear and easy to read. (M. Fowler, 2006) https://www.martinfowler.com/articles/continuousIntegration.html “Continuous Integration: The answer to life, the universe, and everything?” It is always useful to read a viewpoint contrary to the conventional wisdom that continuous integration is a good thing. This article points out some of the problems of introducing CI and suggests that the benefits may not always be as great as expected. (M. Heller, undated) https://techbeacon.$\frac{com}{continuous}$-integration-answer-life-universe-everything “Building and Deploying Software through Continuous Delivery” This is a good summary of the principles of continuous delivery, with useful links to other resources on the topic. (K. Brown, undated) https://www.ibm.com/cloud/garage/content/deliver/practice_continuous_delivery/ “Infrastructure as Code: A Reason to Smile” This is a clear explanation of the benefits of defining your computing infrastructure as code. (J. Sitakange, 2016) https://www.thoughtworks.com/insights/$\frac{blog}{infrastructure-code}$-reason-smile https://iansommerville.$\frac{com}{engineering-software}$-$\frac{products}{dev-and-code}$-management
## 10.1. Explain why adopting DevOps provides a basis for more efficient and effective software
deployment and operation.
## 10.2. Briefly explain why it is essential to use a code management system when several
developers are involved in creating a software system. What are the benefits of using a code management system if only a single developer is involved?
## 10.3. What is the fundamental difference between distributed and centralized code
management systems? How does this difference lead to the most significant benefits of distributed code management systems? M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 337 27/09/2020 14:07

338 Chapter 10 ■ DevOps and Code Management
## 10.4. What does creating a new branch in a code management system mean? What problems
can arise when more than one developer is working on the same code and they try to merge their changes with the project master branch?
## 10.5. Explain how the use of Git and a shared public Git repository simplifies the process of
managing open-source development when many developers may be working on the same code.
## 10.6. What is issue management, and why is it important for software product development?
## 10.7. Explain why there is more to system integration than simply recompiling the code of the
## 10.8. Why does the use of continuous integration make it easier to find bugs in the software that
you are developing?
## 10.9. What are the differences between continuous integration, continuous delivery, and
continuous deployment?
## 10.10. What are process metrics and service metrics? Explain why service metrics are easier to
collect and potentially more accurate than process metrics. M10_SOME6349_01_GE_C10.indd 338 27/09/2020 14:07

Appendix 1 Product and System Engineering Processes I explained in Chapter 1 that this book concentrates on the development of software products. Software products are developed by a company (the vendor) for sale to other individuals, companies, or organisations (the customers). Software product engineering is a distinct activity but it is closely related to software system engineering. Software system engineering, which emerged as an engineering discipline in the 1960s, focuses on the development of software systems that are designed to support the business activities of the purchaser of the software system. It is sometimes called project-based software engineering to reflect the fact that a software project is established to manage and support the software development. Many of the software engineering techniques that we use are applicable to both of these types of software engineering, but there is a critical difference between these activities: an external customer is almost always involved in software systems engineering. I summarized these differences in Figures 1.1 and 1.2, which I have included here (Figures A1.1, A1.2). In software systems engineering, the customer has a problem and, based on their understanding of the problem, must specify the characteristics of the software to be developed. In essence, they identify the requirements for the software. Changes to the requirements are usually suggested by the customer and must be agreed with the company developing the software. In software product engineering, the same company specifies and develops the system. Their software specification is based on an identified opportunity for software that customers might buy and the specification can be easily changed by the company developing the system. Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 339 12/10/2020 16:01

340 Appendix 1 ■ Product and System Engineering Processes Figure A1.1 Project-based software engineering CUSTOMER Problem generates helps-with Requirements Software CUSTOMER and DEVELOPER This book focuses on software product engineering because this is by far the biggest sector of the software market today. This contrasts with the situation around 30 years ago, when the software market was dominated by companies developing custom systems for large companies, the government, and the military. However, there is still a significant market for custom software systems, developed by software project teams. Readers of this book may move between companies developing software products and software systems. My aim in this Appendix is to make this easier by explaining, in more detail, the similarities and the differences between these different types of software engineering. To do this, it makes sense to explain how software engineering started and evolved and then compare the processes of system and product engineering. Figure A1.2 Product software engineering Opportunity inspires realizes Product Software features DEVELOPER DEVELOPER Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 340 12/10/2020 16:01

A.1 ■ The evolution of software engineering 341 A.1 The evolution of software engineering In the early 1960s, a new approach to computer hardware construction was developed based on electronic integrated circuits. In an integrated circuit, electronic components are created within a single piece of semiconducting material (usually silicon) and they are the basis of all modern electronics. It is now possible to include millions of discrete components on a single chip of silicon about the size of a fingernail. The previous generation of computers were expensive systems, built using individual transistors that were wired together. This meant they were bulky, expensive, and unreliable. Their customers were limited to the military, government, research labs, and very large corporations. Integrated circuits revolutionized the computer market. Computers became faster, smaller, and cheaper. The market expanded rapidly and needed software. This included systems software to manage these new, more powerful, computers as well as application software to meet the business needs of customers. Instead of relatively small, focused software systems, there was now a need for large, complex systems. The informal programming techniques that had evolved in universities and in computer companies in the 1950s, however, didn’t scale up to large-scale systems engineering. The initial efforts to develop large software systems were usually late and well over-budget; the developed software was frequently unreliable and did not live up to the expectations of its users. The need for a more disciplined approach to software development was recognized in different places in the mid-1960s. There is some debate about the first use of the term “software engineering,” but Margaret Hamilton, a lead engineer on the Apollo program who was responsible for on-board software development, certainly used the term around 1966. In 1968, the first conference on software engineering was held, sponsored by NATO. A discipline was born. The starting point for a more disciplined approach to software development was managerial and organizational, rather than technical. Large-scale projects involving hardware were developed in a sequence of phases and, in 1970, this phased model was used as a basis for the so-called software life cycle model. This life cycle model is shown in Figure A1.3. The managerial idea behind the lifecycle model was progress. It involved moving from the Requirements phase at the top of the model to the Deployment phase at the bottom (I’ll ignore the Maintenance phase for now). All work on a preceding phase should be completed before the next phase was Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 341 12/10/2020 16:01

342 Appendix 1 ■ Product and System Engineering Processes Figure A1.3 The software life cycle RReeqquuiirreemmeennttss ddeeffiinniittiioonn SSyysstteemm aanndd ssooffttwwaarree ddeessiiggnn IImmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn aanndd uunniitt tteessttiinngg IInntteeggrraattiioonn aanndd ssyysstteemm tteessttiinngg OOppeerraattiioonn aanndd mmaaiinntteennaannccee Acknowledgment: Software Engineering, 10th Edition, Ian Sommerville, Pearson Education Limited started. For example, the requirements for the software must be complete before the software design begins. Work flows from top to bottom and so this model is sometimes called “the waterfall model.” This structured approach makes sense for hardware development because, at that time, it was very expensive to change a hardware unit after it had been manufactured.1 Therefore, it was important to be very clear about what the hardware was supposed to do (its requirements) and to extensively analyze and check the hardware design before it was manufactured. The same approach doesn’t work well for software. The essence of software is that it is malleable—it can be changed during the development process and after delivery. If new requirements emerge while the software is being developed, these can (sometimes) be accommodated in the revised Unfortunately, government, military, and senior company managers did not understand the limitations of the waterfall model, but saw it as a way to improve software management. For the next 20 odd years or so, software engineers developed software by faking their development process so that it fitted the model. Only a small number of enlightened companies initially recognized that the waterfall model was simply not fit for this purpose and they proposed that a development model based on incremental development 1Hardware is still expensive to change but less so as it has become programmable (FPGAs) Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 342 12/10/2020 16:01

A.1 ■ The evolution of software engineering 343 should be adopted. The software is developed in increments and development of an increment can begin before other increments are fully specified. This incremental approach was the basis of agile development and is now the standard approach for all types of software engineering. It should be noted that, in spite of its limitations, the development activities that are identified in the waterfall model are fundamental to all software engineering, and I’ll use these activities as a basis for comparing software product and software system engineering. Before this, however, I want to explain how developments in software technology influenced software engineering. A.1.1 Software technology The waterfall model is a project management model and it does not prescribe the specific methods and techniques that should be used in each of the development phases. Many engineers recognized that software engineering was not simply a management problem but that new techniques and methods were required to aid the production of efficient and reliable software. So, since the inception of software engineering, there has been a drive to improve software tools and technology to reduce the costs of development and improve the reliability of developed programs. Some of the most important methods and technologies that were originally developed to support project-oriented software engineering are: ■■ structured programming in high-level languages, ■■ graphical system modelling, ■■ object-oriented development, ■■ programming environments, ■■ parallel programming, and ■■ application program interfaces. In the 1960s, high-level programming languages such as FORTRAN and COBOL had been developed and were increasingly used. However, the code produced by the compilers for these languages was bulky and slow. Machine assembly language was still commonly used for applications that had to be responsive or had to fit into a relatively small memory space. Programming itself was an informal activity, dependent on individual skills. All new Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 343 12/10/2020 16:01

344 Appendix 1 ■ Product and System Engineering Processes programming and development technologies are, essentially, aimed at providing a structured framework for programming so that the work of different engineers can be easily integrated and so that a software engineer can, relatively easily, take over the work of another engineer when this is necessary. Structured programming Structured programming, proposed in the late 1960s, is based around two fundamental ideas:
# 1. Programs should be written so that they can be read sequentially. The only
conditional statements that should be used are conditionals and simple loops. In the 1960s, it was common to use the so-called goto statements where the programmer could switch control to a completely different code section. Proponents of structured programming argued that this was an error-prone approach that made programs harder to read and understand. The idea of sequential execution was quickly adopted. Nowadays, modern programming languages do not include goto statements.
# 2. Programs should be hierarchically structured using functions and proce-
dures, with components at level N in a hierarchy only using components defined at level N-1. This seemed a good idea in principle but difficult to execute in practice because many functions are reused from different places in a program. However it is an important idea that emphasized the need for locality and understandability in programs. Graphical system modeling Graphical system modelling involves creating different views of a software system and documenting these using a graphical notation. These different views may show how data flows through a system, how a system is structured, how a system processes events, and so on. Early design methods were based around the idea that a system should be designed and documented using these models and a systematic process used to derive programs from these models. Many different modeling notations were proposed but, in the 1990s, a standard approach called the UML (Unified Modeling Language) was developed. This encompassed a range of different models and was focused on supporting object-oriented development. The UML is widely used in documenting custom system designs but is usually used informally, if at all, in product design. Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 344 12/10/2020 16:01

A.1 ■ The evolution of software engineering 345 Object-oriented development Early programming languages depended on procedures and functions to structure programs with shared data either passed as parameters or held as global variables. An alternative approach, based on objects, was first proposed in the late 1960s in the Simula programming language. The idea really came to the fore in the Smalltalk language, developed in the 1970s. Rather than using functions to structure a program, Smalltalk only used objects. The fundamental differences between a function-oriented approach and an object-oriented approach are:
# 1. Objects incorporate both operation code and data. This makes them less
error-prone as the data in objects is protected, unlike global variables in function-oriented programs.
# 2. Objects are members of an object class that defines the object data and the
operations on that data. This is similar to the idea of abstract data types where a data type definition includes the data structure and the operations allowed on that structure.
# 3. Objects are usually organized in a class hierarchy and they can inherit
characteristics and operations from other objects higher up in the hierarchy. Therefore, an object class called “surgeon” could inherit data and operations from a more general class “doctor.” The development of Java in the 1990s led to the widespread adoption of object-oriented development in large-scale systems construction and this is now the most widely used approach to software development. Programming environments The development of Smalltalk and related work in the 1970s introduced another innovation – an integrated programming environment. A programming environment is a set of tools to support programming. Programming environments are usually focused on a specific programming language and the tools have built-in knowledge of the language. As well as compilers, tools may include a syntax-oriented editor, a debugger, and a static analyzer. They may be integrated with a code management system such as Git and provide access to other tools such as UML editing tools or testing tools. Although each programming environment was originally developed around a single language, they obviously have much in common. This led to the development of broader project-support environments such as Eclipse which can be adapted for a range of different programming languages. Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 345 12/10/2020 16:01

346 Appendix 1 ■ Product and System Engineering Processes Concurrent programming The notion of concurrent programming ( parallel programming) was first introduced in the development of timesharing operating systems such as Multics in the 1960s. These systems relied on explicit mechanisms such as semaphores to ensure that concurrently executing programs could share data safely without interfering with each other. These explicit concurrency-management mechanisms, however, are inherently error prone and this led to the incorporation of concurrency support in experimental languages such as Concurrent Pascal, developed in 1975. However, concurrency support only became mainstream in the 1980s when it was included in Ada, a programming language that was sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense specifically for large software system engineering. Language support for concurrency allows the programmer to define structures (often called threads) and to share data between these structures in a controlled way. Threads execute in parallel and may be stopped and started automatically, waiting for data to become available. There is no need for programmers to be concerned with how the data sharing is managed. Concurrency support is now widespread in popular programming languages such as Java, C#, and Python. Application program interfaces Large systems are composed of a number of separate programs that interact with each other rather than a single monolithic program. In the early years of large system development, these programs were developed individually and interaction with other programs was managed on an ad hoc basis. When one program changed, others that used that program also had to be changed. The idea of application program interfaces was probably developed in the 1980s when it became clear that there was a need for a standardized way for a program to access the functionality of another program. As well as a user interface, a programmatic interface for programs was also specified, especially for shared facilities such as those offered by operating systems. An application program interface (API) is a set of functions and objects that are exposed by a program to allow external programs (clients) to access and use its functionality. This means that so long as the API is maintained, program changes can be made without affecting client programs. This was an important development as it made possible the widespread reuse of code. Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 346 12/10/2020 16:01

A.2 ■ A comparison of product and system engineering 347 A.1.2 Software maintenance and evolution The final stage of the software life cycle as shown in Figure A1.3 is software maintenance and evolution. During this stage, new customer requirements emerge and new hardware and supporting software are introduced. An application software system has to be modified and changed to deliver the revised requirements and to continue to work with new hardware and software. Experience has shown that custom software has a very long lifetime. Many large-scale software systems that run our financial infrastructure were developed more than 20 years ago and software that is part of our critical infrastructure and military systems has to remain operational for as long as the hardware is used. Often, being in use for 30 years or more is not exceptional. The cost of maintaining these systems, therefore, is often higher than the initial costs of system development. This is one reason why it is important to use development tools and techniques, such as object-oriented development, that make it easier to understand and change the software. The main problem with software maintenance, however, is that these systems are custom systems designed initially for a set of business needs. They embed assumptions about the business that may not be obvious when the software has to be changed; they are often based around a set of business rules that are not explicitly articulated in one place so the software is, in fact, the rules manual. Changing or replacing the software may break these rules and cause all sorts of unexpected problems. This is the reason why we still have the 20-year-old COBOL systems running financial infrastructures. The risks of change are so great that they cannot be simply re-specified and reimplemented using modern programming technology. A.2 A comparison of product and system engineering In this section, I will compare the development of software products with the development of custom software systems. Recall the critical distinction custom software systems are designed for a specific customer who specifies what they want; software products are specified by the software developer to reflect what they see as the needs of a wide range of customers. I’ll organise this comparison around the general activities of software engineering as specified in the lifecycle model shown in Figure A1.3. But first, I want to talk about the fundamental differences in the development processes for these types of software. Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 347 12/10/2020 16:01

348 Appendix 1 ■ Product and System Engineering Processes A.2.1 The software process Custom software systems are built to the requirements of a specific customer. Consequently, there are important fundamental differences between the processes of software system development and software product development.
# 1. For software systems, there is always a contract agreement stage where
the parties involved agree on the “requirements” (I’ll come to these later) of the software, the price, the timescale for development, and the management reports that will be provided by the developer to the customer.
# 2. Reflecting this contract agreement stage, there is always a customer
acceptance stage, where the customer accepts the software and agrees to pay the contractor for the work done. This is not simply dependent on the software meeting the specification. Many things change over the course of a software project, which may last several years, and the acceptance stage is concerned with whether or not the software is “good enough” for the customer at the time of acceptance. There may be other differences for specific types of systems. For example, government systems often have to be procured using a formal procurement process which is “fair” to contractors and which is intended to ensure that the government is receiving the best value for money. Technically, there are no fundamental differences between product and system engineering. The same languages, tools, and methods may be used and an agile development approach can be followed for both types of systems. In practice, however, for some types of systems, such as safety-critical systems, it is usual to use a more structured process. Techniques such as formal specification and tools such as model checkers which are rarely used for product development, may be used for critical systems. System engineering Both products and custom systems are used in wider technical and socio-technical systems. The development process for the system, as distinct from the software, may include activities such as hardware procurement and installation, hardware design, integration with existing software and hardware systems, user interface design, process design, as well as software engineering. Generally, several companies are involved in the development of such a system. Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 348 12/10/2020 16:01

A.2 ■ A comparison of product and system engineering 349 The challenge in system engineering is to schedule and integrate all of these activities across companies and development groups. This has three consequences for software system engineering:
# 1. Interfaces between the software have to be agreed upon relatively early
in the development process. This requires a detailed software design to be completed before implementation begins.
# 2. There is limited scope for changing these interfaces after they have been
agreed upon as other parts of the system depend on them. This often requires extensive work-arounds in the software as problems with the interfaces are discovered during development.
# 3. Because of the malleability of software, problems in hardware engineer-
ing often develop new software requirements because it is expensive to change the hardware after it has been procured or manufactured. These issues mean that in large scale system engineering, there is less scope for agile and iterative software development. A.2.2 Requirements The term “requirements” came from traditional systems engineering, where the “requirements” were what the customer “required” from the system that was being constructed. They defined these requirements in a separate document called the requirements specification and this was the basis for the contract between the customer and the software development company. There are three fundamental problems with this approach, all of which lead to requirements change:
# 1. Customers find it very difficult to know what they want from a system
until there is a prototype available that they can experiment with. They often change their mind during the development process.
# 2. There are usually different stakeholders in a large system and the require-
ments depend on the extent to which stakeholders engage in the process. Sometimes, stakeholders do not engage before the requirements document is produced but do so after they learn about the impact that the system might have on their work. Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 349 12/10/2020 16:01

350 Appendix 1 ■ Product and System Engineering Processes
# 3. During the development process, the environment of the system inevita-
bly changes and this negates the initial assumptions made when specifying the requirements. The creation of a formal requirements document is still the norm for largescale government and military systems. However, for many commercial systems, the requirements are specified in a less formal way and are negotiated during the development process. However, this can lead to major contractual issues if and when things go wrong. It is sometimes said that software products don’t have requirements. This is certainly true if you think of requirements as they might be expressed for large systems. However, the reality is that there need to be some kind of specification for all software before development starts so that the development team have some idea about what they are trying to achieve. Product specification is normally much less formal and less detailed than system specification. As I have explained in Chapter 3, the specification may simply consist of an outline of the problem that the software is supporting along with a list of features to be included in the software. The specification represents a list of intentions and these will normally change during the development process. These changes sometimes arise because it is difficult to implement certain features as specified and sometimes the specification changes because the developers gain a better understanding of the market and what customers might want. A.2.3 Design In the traditional waterfall process, the software was designed in detail down to a specification of data structures and the individual functions and procedures in the system. This detailed design caused many problems as it could not take into account dynamic issues such as the responsiveness of the software. Now, it is accepted in system engineering that, as far as it is possible, the design stage should focus on the overall system architecture with detailed design left to the system programmers. The exception to this is when the system has to inter-operate with other systems, such as legacy systems. This is the norm for most large systems. It’s important to design the interaction APIs in some detail at an early stage in the process so that teams can work independently on different parts of the system. The same is also true for software products. As I explained in Chapter 4, all design decisions cannot be postponed until development. There needs to be Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 350 12/10/2020 16:01

A.2 ■ A comparison of product and system engineering 351 a discussion about the overall system architecture, the principal components and subsystems have to be identified, and the design documented. One important difference between product engineering and system engineering is that there may be a contractual requirement to document the system design. For products, design documentation tends to be minimal, with the code acting as the design specification. However, for systems that may have to be maintained by different teams long after they have been initially deployed, design documentation, expressed in a notation such as the UML, may be helpful. The major issue with such documentation, however, is the challenge of maintaining it when changes to the system are required. A.2.4 Development The main distinction in the development stage between products and systems is the autonomy of the development team. Product developers are less constrained by external factors such as defined APIs and can make changes to simplify the system and its implementation. Agile methods based on incremental development may be used for systems as well as product engineering; however, if high-level requirements have to be changed, this may slow down the process as the changes may have to be agreed with external stakeholders. For certain types of safety and security critical systems, different development tools such as model checkers and static analyzers may be used to detect possible code anomalies. Some product companies use test-driven development where unit tests are developed before the code is written. This approach is rarely used in custom software development. A.2.5 Testing Automated testing using executable tests may be used for both product and software system engineering. Large and mid-size product and systems companies will also do some external testing where a separate testing group tests the product before it is released to customers. This external testing with detailed test records may be a requirement for regulated systems where a regulator such as the U.S. Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) must approve software before it is put into operation. Testing is a major problem for large-scale systems engineering because parts of the system are created by different companies. These companies may Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 351 12/10/2020 16:01

352 Appendix 1 ■ Product and System Engineering Processes have different testing procedures and standards so that interaction bugs may only be discovered by an external testing team after the system has been integrated. A.2.6 Integration and Deployment A process of continuous integration is commonly used in product development. Whenever a developer is satisfied that the changes they have made are complete, they commit these changes and the system is rebuilt. This is a more difficult process when several companies are involved as they may use different technology platforms to support their development. For these systems, it is more likely that there will be an integration team that collects the components of the system and takes responsibility for system integration. If a software product is delivered as a cloud service, a new version of the system may be deployed as soon as changes are accepted (continuous deployment). Even when continuous deployment is not used, it is normal practice to update and redeploy products on a very frequent basis. By contrast, new releases of custom systems, especially those that add new functionality, tend to be relatively infrequent. The reason for this is that these systems are embedded in business processes and new system versions may mean these processes have to be changed. This is a much slower process than software change and so companies prefer a longer release cycle for their custom software systems. A.2.7 Maintenance and evolution After the software has been delivered, it has to change to reflect changes in its operating environment, expectations of users and external factors such as new laws and regulations. Software product developers decide what changes are required to remain competitive and when to introduce these changes. They are in complete control of the product and so can introduce changes when it is practical to do so. By contrast, custom software systems are owned by a customer and the customer decides what changes are required. They must then interact with software developers who implement the changes. The practical consequence of this is that it takes much longer to agree and deliver changes for custom software systems. Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 352 12/10/2020 16:01

A.2 ■ A comparison of product and system engineering 353 Both software products and software systems can have remarkably long lifespans. I regularly use Microsoft Excel and the first version of this spreadsheet application was delivered in 1985. However, because the product owner is in complete control of the product, they can make decisions to update and change the implementation technology used. Although the name is the same, I suspect there is very little code from the 1985 version of Excel in the current version. Product companies reimplement their software because they understand that, in the longer term, this will make it easier to change in future and so will save them money. For custom software, the software owner decides on the changes required and contracts the implementation of the changes to a development company. Because they don’t understand the software, the owner cannot know when it is sensible to reimplement a system. Consequently, changes are made to the existing system and, over time, this system becomes more and more difficult to understand and expensive to maintain. Often, the technology used to develop the custom system becomes obsolete. This adds to the cost of maintaining the system as the number of developers who have expertise in using this older technology decreases with time. Z01_SOME6349_01_GE_APP.indd 353 12/10/2020 16:01

Index A importance of issues, 99–100 informal models for, 101–102 issues influencing decisions, 98 Acceptance testing, 25 layered models for, 102–103, 108–109, Access control lists (ACLs), 212–213 111–112 Access control policy, 211–212 microservices decisions, 169–171 ACID transactions, 175 module, 104 Activity logging, 263 security layers of, 100 Advanced message queuing protocol services, 103, 111–113 (AMPQ), 174 system availability and, 101 Agile software engineering, 30–59 Architectural style, see Microservices agile manifesto for, 31–32 development principles, 33–34 Architecture, see Cloud software architecture; extreme programming (XP), 34–37 Distribution architecture; Software incremental development of, 32–33 methods of, 30–34 Assert statements, 264–265 Scrum, 37–57 Asymmetric encryption, 215–216, 218 software architecture and, 93–94 Attacks, 195–204, 295–297 Alpha software testing, 271 brute force, 204 Ancestor tree, 245–246 buffer overflow, 199 Application-level encryption, 221 cross-site scripting, 200–201 Application programming interface (API), denial-of-service, 203–204 168–169, 289–290, 346 effects on security, 195–198 feature testing through, 289–290 injection, 198–201 gateway, 168–169 input validation defense, 200, 201 Application services, 112 Architectural design, 98–102, password defense, 204 169–171 security testing, 295–297 authentication layers of, 100 session hijacking, 201–202 components, 103–105 SQL poisoning, 199–200 guidelines, 105–107 temporary lockout defense, 203 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 354 30/09/2020 16:55

Index 355 Attribute-based authentication, 205–206 Branching and merging code, 311, 316–318 Authentication Brute force attacks, 204 attribute-based, 205–206 Buffer overflow attacks, 199 federated identity system for, 207–209 Bugs, software testing for, 269–270, 297–301 iLearn system feature, 87 Business issues knowledge-based, 205–207 cloud platforms, 156–157 microservice architecture, 162–163, 178–180 privacy and, 225–226 mobile device, 209–211 SaaS multi-tenant system customization, 144 multi-factor, 206 Business success measurements, 332 password-based, 206–207 password workflow, 178–180 C possession-based, 205 $\frac{public}{private}$ key encryption for, 216 SaaS issues, 141 Certificate authority (CA), 217–218 security and, 205–211 Chakravarty, Payal, 333 software architecture security layer, 100 Choreography, microservices architecture Authorization, 211–213 workflow, 178–180 access control lists (ACLs), 212–213 Class responsibility, complexity of, 238–240 access control policy, 211–212 Client-server architecture, 113–118 Automated software testing, 283–288 database management system Automation, DevOps, 320–331 (DBMS), 175 aspects of, 320–321 distribution architecture issues, 118 configuration management (CM) tools, distribution architecture model, 113–114 329–330 HTTP protocol, 115 continuous delivery, 326 JSON data representation, 115–116 continuous deployment, 327–329 mobile software products, 113–115 continuous integration (CI), 321–326, 329 model-view-controller (MVC) pattern, dependency model for, 324 file dependencies, 324–325 multi-tier system architecture, 116–117 infrastructure as code, 329–331 issue-tracking tools for, 320–321 service-oriented architecture, 117–118 source code management integration, 321 web-based applications, 113–117 Auto-save, 263–264 XML data representation, 115 Cloud-based software benefits of, 128 B Backlogs, see Product backlog; Sprint microservice architecture for, 168 backlog multi-instance systems, 148–150 BDUF (Big Design Up Front), 93 multi-tenant systems, 142–148 Beck, Kent, 34 remote servers of, 126 Behavior-driven development (BDD), 279 resilience, 127, 153–154 Behavioral pattern, 245–246, 246–248 scalability, 127, 152–153 Beta software testing, 271 services, 134–142 Blacklisting, 253 virtual machines (VMs) for, 129–130 Bottom-up system architecture, 103 virtual servers of, 126–134 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 355 30/09/2020 16:55

356 Index Cloud platforms, 155–157 Container-based multi-instance systems, Cloud software architecture, 150–157 148–150 business issues, 156–157 Containers, 130–134, 191 database organization, 150–152 benefits of, 133–134 delivery platforms, 155–157 cloud-based servers and, 130–134 object-oriented approach of, 154 Docker system, 131–133 scalability and resilience of, 152–154 isolated services of, 130–131 standby system for, 153–154 service deployment and, 191 system monitoring, 154 Continuous delivery, DevOps, 326 technology issues, 155–157 Continuous deployment, 190–191, 327–329 Code completeness checklist, 51 DevOps, 327–329 Code development sprints, 50–51 microservices architecture, 190–191 Code management, 309–320 Continuous integration (CI), 352 centralized source code of, 313 activities of, 322 code transfer, 311 code development sprints, 51 DevOps and, 310 dependency model for, 324 file management features, 311–313 DevOps, 321–326, 329 Git system for, 313–320 extreme programming (XP), 36 merging and branching, 311, 316–318 file dependencies, 324–325 open-source development, 318–320 issue-tracking tools for, 329 practice of, 309–310 Coupling, microservices, 164–165 repository cloning, 313–315 Creational pattern, 245–246, 248 version information, 311 Cross-cutting concerns, architectural design version storage and retrieval, 311, and, 107–108 312–313 Cross-site scripting attacks, 200–201 Code reuse, 244. See also Design patterns Customer experience Code reviews, 297–301 communication and, 22 activities, 298–299 product vision development and, 19 checklist, 300–301 SaaS advantages and disadvantages, process for, 298 139–140 software bug testing, 297–301 Customer prototype demonstration, 26–27 Code smells, 251 Customer testing, 25 Cohesion, microservices, 165 Collective ownership, 36–37 D Column-level encryption, 221 Complexity of system, guidelines for, 104–105 Data Components ACID transactions, 175 relationships, 104–105 complexity, 237 services accessed by, 93 distribution and sharing, microservices, software architecture and, 93 174–178 Configuration management (CM) tools, encryption, 219–221 DevOps, 329–330 failures, 259 Configuration services, 112 inconsistency of, 175–177 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 356 30/09/2020 16:55

Index 357 microservices architecture, 174–178 principles of, 307 privacy and protection of, 223–227 software development, release and support storage and management, SaaS, 140–141 of, 305–306 transaction log, 177–178 Digital certificates, 217–219 Data consistency management, microservices, Direct and indirect service communication, 167 173–174 Database management system (DBMS), 175 Distributed denial-of-service (DDOS) attacks, Databases 203 cloud-based architecture, 150–152 Distributed version control system (DVCS), distribution architecture issues, 118 313 extensibility, 145–147 Distribution architecture, 113–118. See also file encryption, 220 Client-server architecture NoSQL, 120 Docker container system, 131–133 questions to ask when choosing, Document retrieval system, 103 151–152 Domain experience, product vision relational, 120 development and, 19 SaaS multi-tenant systems, 142–143, 145–147 E software architecture issues, 119–120 Decision complexity, 237 Decryption, 213 Effort estimation, Scrum product backlog, Defense, see Attacks 45–46 Delivery platforms, mobile software products, Elasticity, cloud-based servers, 127 120–121. See also Platforms Encryption, 213–223 Denial-of-service attacks, 203–204 application-level, 221 Dependency model, DevOps, 324 asymmetric, 215–216, 218 Dependent data inconsistency, 176 authentication and, 216 Deployment, see Service deployment certificate authority (CA), 217–218 Design patterns, 244–250 column-level, 221 ancestor tree for, 245–246 data, 219–221 behavioral, 245–246, 246–248 database file, 220 creational, 245–246, 248 decryption and, 213 Facade, 249 digital certificates, 217–219 Observer, 246–248 file-level, 220 Prototype, 248 key management system (KMS), separation principles of, 244 221–223 structural, 245–246, 249 multi-level, 220 Development technologies, 122–123 $\frac{public}{private}$ key, 216 DevOps, 305–338 SaaS multi-tenant system concerns, adoption of, 306–307 147–148 automation, 320–331 security and, 213–223 benefits of, 307–308 symmetric, 214–215, 218 code management, 309–320 technology and, 214 measurement programs, 331–335 transport layer security (TLS), 217–218 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 357 30/09/2020 16:55

358 Index End-to-end pathways, 281–282 Feasibility prototype demonstration, 26 Equivalence partitions, 274–276, Feature creep, 83–84 285–286 Feature testing, 274, 278–279 Eriksson, Martin, 21 Features Errors, see Program errors; Software testing coherence of, 80 European Union data protection regulations defined, 61 (GDPR), 224 factors in set design, 82–83 Event-based systems, 102 Git system and design of, 81–82 Exception handling, 260–263 identification of, 80–89 Extensibility multi-tenant system iLearn system, 65, 67–68, 70–75, databases, 145–147 77–78, 84–87 External service failure, 181 independence of, 80 Extreme programming (XP), input/$\frac{action}{output}$ models, 63 34–37 knowledge sources, 80–81 collective ownership, 36–37 list of, 86–88 practices, 36 microservice authentication, 162–163 principles of, 34–35 New Group, 62–64 user stories for, 35–36 personas, 64–69 product vision, 84–86 relevance of, 80 F scenarios, 69–75 software product development Facade pattern, 249 and, 60–91 Failure management template for, 62–64 activity logging, 263 user stories, 76–80 assert statements, 264–265 Federated identity system, 207–209 auto-save, 263–264 File dependencies, DevOps, 324–325 code, 167 File-level encryption, 220 data failures, 259 File management, 311–313 exception handling, 260–263 Fowler, Martin, 182 microservices architecture, 167, Function as a service (FaaS), 136–137 180–183 Functional software testing, 270, program exceptions, 259 272–282 timeout mechanisms, 265 end-to-end pathways for, 281–282 timing failures, 259 equivalence partitions for, 274–276 Fault avoidance, 233–252 feature testing, 274, 278–279 code smells, 251 goals, 270 complexity reduction and, 237–238, interaction tests, 278 251–252 processes, 274 design patterns, 244–250 release testing, 274, 282 program complexity and, system testing, 274, 280–282 235–243 unit testing, 273–277 program errors and, 234–235 usefulness tests, 278 refactoring, 250–252 user stories for, 278–279 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 358 30/09/2020 16:55

Index 359 G extreme programming (XP), 35–36 Scrum, 38, 47 Information leakage, SaaS, 141–142 GET request, HTTP, 188–189 Infrastructure as a service (IaaS), 135–136 Git system, 81–82, 313–320 Infrastructure as code, DevOps, 329–331 advantages of, 314–315 Inheritance hierarchies, complexity of, code management using, 313–320 242–243 feature design and, 81–82 Injection attacks, 198–201 merging and branching, 316–318 Input field, 253 open-source development, 318–320 Input validation, 233, 252–259 repository cloning, 313–315 blacklisting, 253 Graphical user interface (GUI) for, 289 defense from attacks, 200, 201 implementation methods, 254 H number checking, 258–259 programming reliability improvement, 233, 252–259 HTTP protocol regular expressions (REs), 255–258 client-server communication and, 115 security checks, 253–254 direct service communication and, 174 whitelisting, 254 incident description, 186 Integrated services, 112–113 requests and responses, 186–189 Interaction feature tests, 278 RESTful services, 174, 183–189 Interaction recording tools, 290–291 HTTP status codes, 181 Interface technologies, 113 Hybrid execution models, 15–16 Internal service failure, 181 Internal tool development, 18 I Issue-tracking tools, DevOps, 320–321, 329 iLearn system J architectural design principles, 110–111 authentication feature, 87 configuration feature, 87–88 JSON feature characteristics, 84–86 client-server communication and, layered architectural model of, 111–112 115–116 persona examples, 65, 67–68 data representation, 115–116, 174 scenario examples, 70–73 incident description, 187–188 user stories from, 77–78 RESTful services use of, 184, 187–188 vision statement, 20, 84 writing scenarios, 74–75 K Implement once guideline, 106 Incident descriptions, RESTful services, 186, 188 Key management system (KMS), 221–223 Incremental development Knowledge-based authentication, agile methods, 32–34 205–207 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 359 30/09/2020 16:55

360 Index L development of, 160–162 failure management code, 167 functions of, 162–163 Layer models message management code, 166 architectural system decomposition, 102–103, password management, 166 106–109 single responsibility principle, 165–166 authentication, 100 size of, 165–166 cross-cutting concerns, 107–108 support code, 166–167 iLearn architectural design, 111–112 user interface, 167 web-based applications, 108–109 Microservices architecture, 160–194 Load software testing, 270, 272 architectural style of, 167–169 cloud-based systems, 168 data distribution and sharing, 174–178 M design decisions, 169–171 direct and indirect service communication, Maintainability, programming and, 231–232 173–174 Management. failure management, 180–182 code management, 309–320 message brokers, 173–174 data consistancy, 167 mobile device photo-printing example, data storage and, SaaS, 140–141 168–169 database management system (DBMS), REST architectural style, 183–184 175 RESTful services, 183–188 failure management, 180–183 service communications, 171–174 message management code, 166 service coordination, 178–180 microservices architecture, 166–167, service deployment, 188–192 180–183 software services and, 160–163 password management, 166 synchronous and asynchronous interaction, security, 197 172–173 system responsibilities for services, 136 workflow, 178–180 Manual system testing, 290 Mobile devices and software products Measurement programs, DevOps, 331–335 authentication, 209–211 data collection for, 335 client-server architecture, 113–115 metrics for, 333–334 delivery platforms, 120–121 types of, 332 distribution architecture issues, 118 Merging and branching code, 311, 316–318 intermittent connectivity, 120 Message brokers, 173–174 microservices architecture photo-printing Message management code, microservices, example, 168–169 166 model-view-controller (MVC) pattern, Microservices 114–115 authentication features, 162–163 on-screen keyboards, 121 characteristics of, 164–165 power management, 121 cohesion, 165 processor power, 120 coupling, 164–165 Model-view-controller (MVC) pattern, data consistancy management, 167 114–115 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 360 30/09/2020 16:55

Index 361 Module, 104 Open-source development, Git system, Monolithic systems, 154, 168 318–320 Moore, Geoffrey, 18 Open-source software decisions, 122 Multi-instance systems, 148–150 Orchestration, microservices architecture Multi-level encryption, 220 workflow, 178–180 Multi-tenant systems, 142–148 advantages and disadvantages of, 143 P business customization requirements, 144 database extensibility, 145–147 databases, 142–143 Password authentication, 178–180, 206–207 encryption concerns, 147–148 choreographed vs orchestrated approaches, multilevel access control, 147–148 178–180 security concerns, 147–148 microservices architecture workflow, software as a service (SaaS) design and, 178–180 141–142 security and, 206–207 user interfaces for SaaS access, Password management, microservices, 166 144–145 Passwords used in attacks and defense, 204 Multi-tier web-based system architecture, Performance software testing, 270–271 116–117 Personas, 64–69 Multilevel access control, SaaS multi-tenant Plan-driven development, 31 systems, 147–148 Platform as a service (PaaS), 135–136 Multiple database architecture, 96–97 Platforms business issues, 156–157 cloud-based software, 155–157 N mobile software product delivery, 120–121 software product functionality and, 14–15 Name checking technology issues, 120–121, 155–157 equivalence partitions and, 275–276 Possession-based authentication, 205 functions, 256–257, 275–276 Privacy, 223–227 input validation, 253–254, 256–257 business reasons, 225–226 regular expressions (REs) and, 256–257 concept of, 223–224 Nested conditional statements, complexity of, controls, 226–227 240–242 data protection laws, 224–225 New Group features, 62–64 data protection principles, 225–226 Newman, Sam, 180 European Union data protection regulations NoSQL databases, 120 (GDPR), 224 Number checking, 258–259 Process measurements, 332 Process metrics, 333–334 Product backlog O creation, 44 effort estimation, 45–46 Object-oriented systems, 154, 345 estimation, 44–46 Observer pattern, 246–248 prioritization, 44–45 One-off custom software, 11–12, 31 product manager (PM) for, 24 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 361 30/09/2020 16:55

362 Index Product backlog (Continued) Program complexity, 235–243 refinement, 44 class responsibility and, 238–240 Scrum agile processing, 39–40, 42–46 data, 237 software use of, 24 decision, 237 sprint cycle and, 39–40 fault avoidance and, 235–243 story points, 45 inheritance hierarchies and, 242–243 velocity, 46 nested conditional statements and, 240–242 Product backlog items (PBIs), 42–45 reduction guidelines, 238 backlog grooming of activities, 44 structural, 237 effort estimation, 45–46 Program errors, 234–235, 269. See also Fault examples of, 42 avoidance Scrum agile processing, 42–45 causes of, 234–235 states of, 43 understanding, 269 story points, 45 Program exceptions, 259 Product backlog review Programming, 231–269 Scrum, 43–45 errors, 269 sprints, 47, 52 failure management, 233, 259–265 Product-based software engineering, 13–15, fault avoidance, 233–252 339–340 input validation, 233, 252–259 Product experience, product vision maintainability, 231–232 development and, 19 product quality attributes for, 231–232 Product managers (PMs), 21–25 reliability of, 231–233 acceptance testing by, 25 user experience attributes for, 231 business needs from, 21 Project-based software engineering, 12–14 customer experience and communication, 22 Prototype pattern, 248 customer testing and, 25 Prototyping, 19, 26–27 product backlog and, 24 customer demonstration of, 26–27 product roadmap development, 23–24 feasibility demonstration of, 26 product vision use of, 22–23 product vision development and, 19 software development by, 21–25 software development and, 26–27 technology constraints and awareness, 22 $\frac{Public}{private}$ key encryption, 216 user interface (UI) design and, 25 user scenarios and stories, 24 R Product Owner, Scrum development role, 38–39, 55 Product quality attributes, 231–232 RabbitMQ service broker, 173–174 Product roadmap development, 23–24 Refactoring, 36, 250–252 Product vision, 17–20 Regression software testing, 288 features derived from, 84–86 Regular expressions (REs), 255–258 fundamental questions for, 17–19 Relational databases, 120 information sources for, 19 Release testing, 274, 282 product managers (PMs) for, 22–23 Reliability of programming, 231–233 software development and, 17–20 Remote servers, 126. See also Cloud-based visual learning environment (VLE), 20 software; Virtual servers Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 362 30/09/2020 16:55

Index 363 Replica inconsistency, 176 ScrumMaster, 38–39, 55–57 Repository cloning, Git system, 313–315 Security Representational state transfer (REST) architectural design and, 100 architectural style, 183–184 attacks on, 195–204 Research software, 18 authentication, 205–211 Resilience, cloud-based servers, 127, 153–154 authorization, 211–213 RESTful services, 174, 183–189 cloud-based features for, 197–198 direct service communication of, 174 cross-cutting concern of, 107–108 HTTP requests and responses, 186–189 encryption, 147–148, 213–223 incident descriptions, 186, 188 input validation for, 253–254 JSON for, 184, 187–188 layers of authentication, 100 microservices architecture and, 174, management, 197 183–189 multilevel access control, 147–148 operations for, 185–186 privacy, 223–227 principles of, 184–185 SaaS multi-tenant system concerns, REST architectural style for, 183–184 147–148 XML for, 184, 187–188 software architecture influence on, 95–96 system decomposition and, 107–108 S system infrastructure stack, 195–197 Security testing, 270, 272, 295–297 SaaS, see Software as a service (SaaS) attack prevention, 295–297 Scalability, cloud-based servers, 127, goals, 270, 272 152–153 programming mistakes, 297 Scenarios, 69–75 risk-based approach, 295–296 important elements of, 70–71 vulnerability testing challenges, 295 narrative, 71–73 Self-organizing development team, 39, product manager (PM) role, 23–24 52–57 structured, 72 agile software engineering, 39, 52–57 user stories and, 23–24 Product Owner responsibilities, 55 writing, 73–75 Scrum approach, 52–55 Scrum, 37–57 ScrumMaster role, 55–57 backlog review, 43–45 Separation of concerns guideline, 105 benefits of, 41–42 Server choices, 121 potentially shippable product increment, 39 Service-based execution models, 15–16 process (sprint cycle), 39–40 Service communications, 171–174, 183–188 product backlog, 39–40, 42–46 direct and indirect, 173–174 Product Owner, 38–39, 55 message brokers, 173–174 product, 39 RESTful services, 183–188 self-organizing development team, 39, synchronous and asynchronous interaction, 52–57 172–173 sprints, 39–40, 46–52 Service coordination, microservices terminology for, 38–39 architecture, 178–180. See also velocity, 39, 46 Workflow Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 363 30/09/2020 16:55

364 Index Service deployment, 188–192 multiple database, 96–97 containers, 191 multi-tier, 116–117 continuous deployment, 190–191 nonfunctional system quality attributes and, microservices architecture, 188–192 94–95 versions (changes) of a service, 191–192 object-oriented, 154 Service-level agreements (SLAs), 157 platforms, 120–121, 155–157 Service measurements, 332 resilience of systems, 153–154 Service metrics, 333–334 scalability of systems, 152–153 Service-oriented systems, 110–111, 117–118 service, 93, 103, 111–113 Service performance failure, 181–182 service-oriented, 110–111, 117–118, 154 Services. See also Microservices services of components, 93 component access of, 93 shared database, 96 application, 112 system decomposition, 102–113 cloud-based software, 134–142 system security influenced by, 95–96, 107–108 configuration, 112 technology issues, 113, 118–123, 155–157 everything as, 134–137 Software as a service (SaaS), 135–142 function as a service (FaaS), 136–137 authentication, 141 infrastructure as a service (IaaS), 135–136 benefits of, 137–138 integrated, 112–113 cloud-based software products, 135–142 integration of, 111–113 customer advantages and disadvantages, platform as a service (PaaS), 135–136 139–140 shared services layer, 108–109 data storage and management issues, 140–141 software architecture and, 93 design issues, 141–142 software as a service (SaaS), 135–142 information leakage, 141–142 system decomposition and, multi-instance systems for, 148–150 system management responsibilities for, multi-tenancy issues, 142 136 multi-tenant systems for, 142–148 web-based services, 108–109 user interfaces for, 144–145 Session hijacking attacks, 201–202 Software development, release and support Shared database architecture, 96 of, 305–306. See also DevOps Single responsibility principle, microservices, Software product lines, 14–15 165–166 Software products, 11–29 Software architecture, 92–125, 150–157 acceptance testing, 25 agile development and, 93–94 customer testing, 25 architectural design, 98–102 design of, 60–61 business issues, 156–157 engineering use of, 11–12 client-server, 113–118 execution models, 15–16 cloud-based, 150–157 features, 60–91 component, 92–93, 103 one-off, 11–12 databases, 119–120, 150–152 product-based, 13–15 defined, 92–93 product development, 11–17 distribution, 113–118 product managers (PMs), 21–25 importance of, 94–97 product prototyping, 26–27 module, 104 product vision, 17–20 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 364 30/09/2020 16:55

Index 365 project-based, 12–14 Support code, microservices, 166–167 user interface (UI) design, 25 Symmetric encryption, 214–215, 218 Software testing, 269–304, 351–352 Synchronous and asynchronous interaction, alpha, 271 172–173 beta, 271 System decomposition, 102–113 bugs and, 269–270 architectural design guidelines, 105–107 code reviews, 297–301 complexity of system and, 104–105 functional, 270, 272–282 component relationships, 104–105 load, 270, 272 cross-cutting concerns, 107–108 performance, 270–271 event-based systems, 102 security, 270, 272, 295–297 iLearn architectural design, 110–112 test automation, 51, 283–291 layer models for, 102–103, 106–109, test-driven development (TDD), 291–294 111–112 understanding programming errors, 269 service integration, 103, 111–113 user, 270–271 technology-related choices, 113 Source code management integration, validation concerns, 107 DevOps, 321 web-based applications, 108–109 Spolsky, Joel, 18 System infrastructure stack, 195–197 Sprint backlog, 39–40, 50 System management responsibilities, cloudSprints, 39–40, 46–52 based software services, 136 activities, 47–48 System monitoring, cloud-based benefits of, 47 software, 154 code completeness checklist, 51 System testing, 274, 280–282, 290 code development, 50–51 end-to-end pathways for, 281–282 continuous integration, 51 environmental testing, 280 execution, 47 feature interaction, 280, 290 goals, 48–49 process, 274 planning, 47 product backlog and, 39–40, 50 reviewing, 47, 52 T Scrum process for, 39–40 test automation, 51 timeboxing, 46–47 Technology issues velocity, 39, 49–50 cloud platforms, 155–157 SQL command, 199 constraints and awareness, 22 SQL poisoning attacks, 199–200 database choices, 119–120 Stable interfaces guideline, 106 delivery platforms, 120–121 Stand-alone execution models, 15–16 development technologies, 122–123 Standby system, cloud architecture, encryption and, 214 153–154 interface technologies, 113 Story points, Scrum product backlog, 45 layer affects, 113 Structural complexity, 237 open-source software decisions, 122 Structural pattern, 245–246, 249 server choices, 121 Student projects, 18 system decomposition, 113 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 365 30/09/2020 16:55

366 Index Temporary lockout defense, 203 microsystems, 167 Test automation, 51, 283–291 SaaS multi-tenant systems, 144–145 application programming interface (API), User software testing, 270–271 289–290 User stories, 76–80 automated testing, 283–288 defined from scenarios, 77–80 code development sprints, 51 epic, 77 equivalence partitions for, 285–286 extreme programming (XP), 35–36 graphical user interface (GUI) for, 289 feature description from, 78–79 interaction recording tools for, 290–291 feature testing and, 278–279 manual system testing, 290 incremental planning, 35–36 regression testing, 288 negative, 79 software testing and, 283–291 product manager (PM) role, 23–24 system testing, 290 software product development and, 76–80 test pyramid for, 288 test runner for, 286 testing frameworks for, 283–285 V Test-driven development (TDD), 36, 291–294 Validation concerns, architectural design and, Test pyramid, 288 107 Testing frameworks, 283–285 Velocity, Scrum sprint and product backlog, Timeboxed sprint, 46–52. See also Sprints 39, 46, 49–50 Timeout mechanisms, 182–183, 265 Virtual machines (VMs), 129–130 microservices failure checks, 182–183 Virtual servers, 126–134. See also Cloudprogram failure management using, 265 based software Timing failures, 259 cloud-based software use of, 126–129 Top-down system architecture, 102 Torvalds, Linus, 313 Transaction log, 177–178 remote servers as, 126 Transport layer security (TLS), 217–218 resilience, 127 scalability, 127 U virtual machines (VMs) for, 129–130 Vision statement, 20 Visual learning environment (VLE), 20 Unit testing, 273–277 VM-based multi-instance systems,148–150 equivalence partitions for, 274–276 function testing process for, 273–274 guidelines, 277 W name-checking functions, 275–276 Usage measurements, 332 Usefulness feature tests, 278 Web-based applications User experience attributes, 231 client-server architecture, 113–117 User interface (UI) design, 25 distribution architecture issues, 118 User interfaces layered architecture for, 108–109 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 366 30/09/2020 16:55

Index 367 model-view-controller (MVC) pattern, X multi-tier system architecture, XML 116–117 client-server communication and, 115–116 RESTful services, 174, 183–189 data representation, 115 incident description, 187–188 system decomposition and, 108–109 RESTful services use of, 184, 187–188 Whitelisting, 254 Workflow, 178–180 choreography, 178–180 Y microservices architecture, 178–180 orchestration, 180 password authentication example, YAGNI (You Ain't Gonna Need It) principle, 178–180 35, 93 Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 367 30/09/2020 16:55

This page is intentionally left blank Z02_SOME6349_01_GE_IDX.indd 368 30/09/2020 16:55